 
INSTITUTE OF LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING AND RESEARCH (ILDR) 
 
 
With the ever-increasing number of legislations covering every aspect of human life, the 
importance of modern legislative drafting hardly needs any further emphasis. Legislative 
Drafting has its own challenges, and expertise is required for drafting precise and clear 
legislation. The prospective Legislative Counsel needs orientation and training to develop the 
aptitude and skill in legislative drafting. With a view to increasing the availability of trained 
Legislative Counsel in the country, the Institute of Legislative Drafting and Research (ILDR) 
was established as a Wing of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice in 
January, 1989 on the initiatives of Mrs. Ramadevi, former Secretary, Legislative Department and 
ex-Governor. Since then, ILDR has been imparting theoretical as well as practical training in 
Legislative Drafting. The following courses and programmes are being conducted by ILDR, 
namely:- 
 
1. Basic Course in Legislative Drafting of 3 months’ duration for the Law Officers of the 
State Governments and Union territory Administrations. 
2. Appreciation Course of 15 days’ duration for the officers of the various Central 
Government Ministries/Departments/attached offices/Subordinate and autonomous 
bodies who are dealing with, or likely to deal with, Legislative proposals. 
3. Voluntary Internship Program for the students of Law pursuing 4th and 5th year of Five-
year Law Degree Course or 3rd Year of Three-year Law Degree Course from a recognised 
University or Institute. 
 
ILDR is functioning under the Legislative Department having a Course Director, who is the 
controlling officer of ILDR. Presently, Dr. Manoj Kumar, Additional Secretary is functioning as 
the Course Director, who can be reached at Room No. 416, ‘A’ Wing, 4th Floor, Shastri Bhawan, 
New Delhi – 110001. 
 
Tele-fax: 011-23073497 
Email: as-ld-molj@gov.in 
 
The Branch Officer is Shri S. K. Gautam, Assistant Legislative Counsel, who can be 
reached at Room No. 403, ‘D’ Wing, 4th Floor, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi – 110001. 
 
Tel: 011-23385456 
Email: ildr.ld@nic.in 
Estd. 1989 
An ISO 9001:2015 Certified Institute 
