Question: What is India according to the Union and its Territory?
Answer: India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.

Question: How is India, that is Bharat, defined in terms of its political structure?
Answer: India, that is Bharat, is defined as a Union of States according to the Union and its Territory.

Question: What does the territory of India comprise of?
Answer: The territory of India shall comprise the territories of the States, the Union territories specified in the First Schedule, and such other territories as may be acquired.

Question: What does the territory of a country, such as India, comprise of, according to their constitutional provisions?
Answer: The territory of a country like India comprises the territories of the States, the Union territories specified in the First Schedule, and such other territories as may be acquired.

Question: Who has the authority to admit or establish new States into the Union?
Answer: Parliament may by law admit into the Union, or establish, new States.

Question: Who can, by law, admit or establish new States into the Union?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Under what circumstances can a new State be formed?
Answer: A new State can be formed by separation of territory from any State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any territory to a part of any State.

Question: What are the ways in which a new State can be formed?
Answer: A new State can be formed by separation of territory from any State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any territory to a part of any State.

Question: What power does the Parliament have over the area and boundaries of a State?
Answer: Parliament may by law increase the area of any State, diminish the area of any State, alter the boundaries of any State, and alter the name of any State.

Question: What can Parliament do by law in relation to the area, boundaries, and name of a State?
Answer: Parliament may by law increase the area of any State, diminish the area of any State, alter the boundaries of any State, and alter the name of any State.

Question: Can a Bill for altering the area, boundaries or name of any States be introduced without the recommendation of the President?
Answer: No, a Bill for the purpose shall not be introduced in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President.

Question: What is required for a Bill to be introduced in either House of Parliament for altering the area, boundaries or name of any States?
Answer: The Bill can only be introduced on the recommendation of the President.

Question: What does 'State' include in clauses (a) to (e)?
Answer: In clauses (a) to (e), 'State' includes a Union territory.

Question: What does 'State' refer to in clauses (a) to (e)?
Answer: A Union territory

Question: Does 'State' include a Union territory in the proviso?
Answer: In the proviso, 'State' does not include a Union territory.

Question: What does 'State' refer to in the proviso? Does it include a Union territory?
Answer: In the proviso, 'State' refers to a geographical and administrative region, but it does not include a Union territory.

Question: What does the power conferred on Parliament by clause (a) include?
Answer: The power conferred on Parliament by clause (a) includes the power to form a new State or Union territory by uniting a part of any State or Union territory.

Question: What does the formation of a new State or Union territory by uniting a part of any State or Union territory fall under?
Answer: The formation of a new State or Union territory by uniting a part of any State or Union territory falls under the power conferred on Parliament by clause (a).

Question: What does any law referred to in article 2 or article 3 contain?
Answer: Such law contains provisions for the amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law. It may also contain supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions, including provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law.

Question: What do the provisions of a law referred to in article 2 or article 3 typically contain or affect?
Answer: These laws typically contain provisions for the amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule, and may include supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions. These can affect representation in Parliament and in the Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law.

Question: What is not considered an amendment of the Constitution under the context of articles 2 and 3?
Answer: Any law referred to in article 2 or article 3 is not deemed to be an amendment of the Constitution for the purposes of article 368.

Question: What is the status of any law referred to in article 2 or article 3 in terms of being considered an amendment of the Constitution for the purposes of article 368?
Answer: Any law referred to in article 2 or article 3 is not deemed to be an amendment of the Constitution for the purposes of article 368.

Question: Who is considered a citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: Every person who has his domicile in the territory of India and was born in the territory of India, or either of whose parents was born in the territory of India, or who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not less than five years immediately preceding such commencement, is considered a citizen of India.

Question: What are the criteria for a person to be considered a citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: A person will be considered a citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution if they have their domicile in the territory of India and were born in the territory of India, or either of whose parents was born in the territory of India, or who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not less than five years immediately preceding such commencement.

Question: Who is deemed to be a citizen of India if they migrated from Pakistan?
Answer: A person who has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in Pakistan is deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this Constitution if he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, and if he has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration.

Question: What are the conditions for a person migrating from Pakistan to be deemed a citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: A person who has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in Pakistan is deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this Constitution if he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, and if he has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration.

Question: Who can be registered as a citizen of India?
Answer: A person can be registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed by the Government of the Dominion of India if he/she has made an application and has been a resident in the territory of India for at least six months immediately preceding the date of his application.

Question: What is the process and eligibility for a person to be registered as a citizen of India?
Answer: A person can be registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed by the Government of the Dominion of India if he/she has made an application and has been a resident in the territory of India for at least six months immediately preceding the date of his application.

Question: What is the condition for a migrant to Pakistan to not be deemed a citizen of India?
Answer: A person who has migrated from the territory of India to the territory now included in Pakistan after the first day of March, 1947, shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India unless they have returned to the territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued by or under the authority of any law.

Question: When would a person who migrated from India to Pakistan after March 1, 1947, still be considered a citizen of India?
Answer: If they have returned to the territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued by or under the authority of any law.

Question: What are the rights of citizenship for certain persons of Indian origin residing outside India?
Answer: Any person who or either of whose parents or any of whose grand-parents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside India as so defined shall be deemed to be a citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where he is residing.

Question: Who is deemed to be a citizen of India if registered by the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where they are residing?
Answer: Any person who or either of whose parents or any of whose grand-parents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside India.

Question: What happens if a person voluntarily acquires citizenship of a foreign state according to Indian law?
Answer: No person shall be a citizen of India if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State.

Question: What is the consequence according to Indian law if a person voluntarily acquires the citizenship of any foreign State?
Answer: No person shall be a citizen of India if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State.

Question: Who has the power to make provisions with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship in India?
Answer: The Parliament has the power to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.

Question: Who has the power to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship in India?
Answer: The Parliament has the power.

Question: What is the definition of 'the State' in the context of Indian law?
Answer: 'The State' includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

Question: What entities are included in 'the State' according to Indian law?
Answer: 'The State' includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

Question: What happens to laws that are inconsistent with the provisions of the constitution in India?
Answer: All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.

Question: What is the status of laws in force in the territory of India that are inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution after its commencement?
Answer: All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.

Question: What is the definition of 'law' and 'laws in force' in the context of Indian law?
Answer: 'Law' includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of law; and 'laws in force' includes laws passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority.

Question: What does the term 'Law' and 'laws in force' include according to the Indian legal system?
Answer: 'Law' includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of law; and 'laws in force' includes laws passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority.

Question: What does the Right to Equality state in the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Right to Equality states that the state shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India. The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.

Question: Does the Constitution of India provide any specific protections or prohibitions on discrimination based on religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth? If so, what are they?
Answer: Yes, according to the Right to Equality in the Constitution of India, the state cannot discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth, or any of them. In addition, no citizen can be subjected to any disability, liability, restriction, or condition about access to shops, public restaurants, hotels, and places of public entertainment; or the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads, and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.

Question: What exceptions are there to the prohibition of discrimination in the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Constitution allows the State to make special provisions for women and children, for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. These special provisions can also relate to their admission to educational institutions, including private ones.

Question: What special provisions does the Indian Constitution allow the State to make for women, children, socially and educationally backward classes of citizens, and the Scheduled Castes and Tribes?
Answer: The Constitution allows the State to make special provisions for these groups, which can relate to their advancement and their admission to educational institutions, including private ones.

Question: What does article 14 of the Constitution of India state?
Answer: Article 14 states that the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.

Question: Which article of the Constitution of India states that the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India?
Answer: Article 14

Question: What is prohibited by article 15 of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Article 15 prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. It also states that no citizen should be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to access to certain public places and facilities on these grounds.

Question: Which article of the Constitution of India states that no citizen should be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to access to certain public places and facilities on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth?
Answer: Article 15 of the Constitution of India states this.

Question: What does sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 or clause (2) of article 29 not prevent the State from doing?
Answer: It does not prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5). It also allows for special provisions for these economically weaker sections relating to their admission to educational institutions, including private ones, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.

Question: What special provisions does sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 or clause (2) of article 29 allow the State to make for economically weaker sections of citizens, and in what areas are these provisions applicable?
Answer: Sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 or clause (2) of article 29 allows the State to make special provisions for the advancement of any economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5). These special provisions also relate to their admission to educational institutions, including private ones, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.

Question: What does 'economically weaker sections' refer to in the context of this article and article 16?
Answer: 'Economically weaker sections' refers to groups that may be notified by the State from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage.

Question: Who does the State notify as part of the 'economically weaker sections' based on family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage?
Answer: 'Economically weaker sections' refers to groups that may be notified by the State from time to time.

Question: What provisions does article 16 make for equality of opportunity?
Answer: Article 16 ensures equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State. It prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, or residence.

Question: Which article of the constitution prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, or residence in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State?
Answer: Article 16 prohibits discrimination on these grounds in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.

Question: Can any law prescribe a requirement as to residence within a State or Union territory prior to employment or appointment to an office under the Government?
Answer: Yes, nothing in this article prevents Parliament from making a law that prescribes a requirement as to residence within a State or Union territory prior to such employment or appointment.

Question: Does anything in this article prevent Parliament from making a law that prescribes a requirement as to residence within a State or Union territory prior to such employment or appointment?
Answer: No, nothing in this article prevents Parliament from making such a law.

Question: What does the article state about the reservation of appointments or posts for backward classes of citizens?
Answer: The article states that the State can make provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.

Question: Who can make provision for the reservation of appointments or posts for any backward class of citizens that is not adequately represented in the services under the State?
Answer: The State can make provision for the reservation of appointments or posts.

Question: What does clause 4A of the article state about reservation in matters of promotion?
Answer: Clause 4A states that the State can make provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State.

Question: Which clause allows the State to make provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State?
Answer: Clause 4A of the article allows this.

Question: What does clause 4B of the article state about unfilled vacancies of a year?
Answer: Clause 4B states that the State can consider any unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause 4 or clause 4A as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years. Such class of vacancies shall not be considered together with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for determining the ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.

Question: What does clause 4B state about how the State can consider any unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause 4 or clause 4A, and how does it affect the determination of the ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation?
Answer: Clause 4B states that the State can consider any unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause 4 or clause 4A as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years. Such class of vacancies shall not be considered together with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for determining the ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.

Question: What does the article say about the reservation of appointments for economically weaker sections?
Answer: The article states that the State can make provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the posts in each category.

Question: What provisions can the State make for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of economically weaker sections of citizens, according to the article?
Answer: The State can make provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the posts in each category.

Question: What does the article 17 state about untouchability?
Answer: Article 17 states that “Untouchability” is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden.

Question: Which article states that the practice of 'Untouchability' is abolished and forbidden in any form?
Answer: Article 17 states that 'Untouchability' is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden.

Question: What is the punishment for enforcing disability arising out of 'Untouchability'?
Answer: It shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.

Question: What will happen if someone enforces disability arising out of 'Untouchability'?
Answer: It shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.

Question: Can the state confer any titles?
Answer: No title, not being a military or academic distinction, shall be conferred by the State.

Question: What types of titles can the State not confer?
Answer: The State cannot confer any title that is not a military or academic distinction.

Question: Can a citizen of India accept any title from any foreign State?
Answer: No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State.

Question: Is it allowed for an Indian citizen to accept a title from a foreign State?
Answer: No, it is not allowed for an Indian citizen to accept any title from any foreign State.

Question: Can a non-citizen of India holding an office of profit or trust under the State accept any title from a foreign State?
Answer: No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while he holds any office of profit or trust under the State, accept without the consent of the President any title from any foreign State.

Question: Who needs the consent of the President to accept any title from a foreign State while holding an office of profit or trust under the State?
Answer: A person who is not a citizen of India needs the consent of the President to accept any title from a foreign State while holding an office of profit or trust under the State.

Question: What are the rights of citizens under the Right to Freedom?
Answer: All citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression, to assemble peaceably and without arms, to form associations or unions, co-operative societies, to move freely throughout the territory of India, to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India, and to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.

Question: What does the Right to Freedom grant to all citizens in terms of speech, assembly, associations, movement, residence, and profession?
Answer: The Right to Freedom grants all citizens the right to freedom of speech and expression, to assemble peaceably and without arms, to form associations or unions, co-operative societies, to move freely throughout the territory of India, to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India, and to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.

Question: Can the State make any law imposing restrictions on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and expression?
Answer: Yes, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.

Question: Under what circumstances can the State impose restrictions on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and expression?
Answer: The State can impose restrictions on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and expression in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.

Question: What does sub-clause (c) of the clause allow the state to do?
Answer: Sub-clause (c) allows the state to make any law imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or morality.

Question: What does sub-clause (c) allow the state to impose on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause?
Answer: Sub-clause (c) allows the state to impose any law imposing reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or morality.

Question: What does sub-clauses (d) and (e) of the clause allow the state to do?
Answer: Sub-clauses (d) and (e) allow the state to make any law imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of any of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses, either in the interests of the general public or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.

Question: What do sub-clauses (d) and (e) allow the state to impose on the exercise of any of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses?
Answer: Sub-clauses (d) and (e) allow the state to impose any law imposing reasonable restrictions, either in the interests of the general public or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.

Question: What does sub-clause (g) of the clause allow the state to do?
Answer: Sub-clause (g) allows the state to make any law imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, in the interests of the general public, including laws relating to the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business, or the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry or service.

Question: What does sub-clause (g) allow the state to impose on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, in the interests of the general public, and what are some examples?
Answer: Sub-clause (g) allows the state to make any law imposing reasonable restrictions, including laws relating to the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business, or the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry or service.

Question: What protection is provided in respect of conviction for offences?
Answer: No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the commission of the Act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence.

Question: What does the law state about the conviction of a person for any offence?
Answer: No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the commission of the Act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence.

Question: What does it mean to be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once?
Answer: No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once. This means that once a person has been legally processed and penalized for a specific crime, they should not be subjected to prosecution and punishment for the same crime again.

Question: What is the legal principle that prevents a person from being prosecuted and punished for the same crime more than once?
Answer: The principle that no person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once is the legal safeguard that prevents a person from being penalized multiple times for the same crime.

Question: Can a person accused of any offence be compelled to testify against themselves?
Answer: No, a person accused of an offence shall not be compelled to be a witness against himself.

Question: Is it permitted for a person accused of an offence to be forced to be a witness against himself?
Answer: No, a person accused of an offence shall not be compelled to be a witness against himself.

Question: What is the right to life and personal liberty?
Answer: The right to life and personal liberty means that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.

Question: What does it mean when a person is not deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law?
Answer: It means the person is exercising their right to life and personal liberty.

Question: What is the right to education?
Answer: The right to education means that the State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in a manner determined by law.

Question: What does the State provide to all children of the age of six to fourteen years according to law?
Answer: The State provides the right to free and compulsory education.

Question: What are the protections against arrest and detention in certain cases?
Answer: The protections against arrest and detention in certain cases include the right to be informed of the grounds for arrest, the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of choice, and the right not to be detained in custody beyond a certain period without the authority of a magistrate.

Question: What rights does a person have when arrested or detained, including the duration of detention without a magistrate's authority?
Answer: When arrested or detained, a person has the right to be informed of the grounds for arrest, the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of choice, and the right not to be detained in custody beyond a certain period without the authority of a magistrate.

Question: Who is exempt from the protections against arrest and detention?
Answer: The protections against arrest and detention do not apply to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien, or to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention.

Question: To whom do the protections against arrest and detention not apply?
Answer: The protections against arrest and detention do not apply to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien, or to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention.

Question: What are the conditions for preventive detention for more than three months?
Answer: No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High Court has reported before the expiration of the said period of three months.

Question: Who needs to report before the expiration of three months for a person to be held in preventive detention for a longer period?
Answer: An Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High Court needs to report before the expiration of the said period of three months.

Question: What does the authority have to communicate to a person who is detained?
Answer: The authority making the order shall communicate to such person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order.

Question: What should be communicated to a detained person by the authority making the order, and when should the person be given the opportunity to make a representation against the order?
Answer: The authority making the order shall communicate to such person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order.

Question: What can the Parliament prescribe according to clause (7)?
Answer: Parliament may by law prescribe the circumstances under which a person may be detained for a period longer than three months without obtaining the opinion of an Advisory Board, the maximum period for which any person may be detained, and the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board in an inquiry.

Question: What circumstances, maximum detention period, and Advisory Board inquiry procedure can the Parliament prescribe by law according to a specific clause?
Answer: According to clause (7), Parliament may by law prescribe the circumstances under which a person may be detained for a period longer than three months without obtaining the opinion of an Advisory Board, the maximum period for which any person may be detained, and the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board in an inquiry.

Question: What does article 23 of 'THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA' state?
Answer: Article 23 states that traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labour are prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.

Question: Which article of 'THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA' states that traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labour are prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law?
Answer: Article 23

Question: Can the State impose compulsory service for public purposes according to article 23?
Answer: Yes, nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing compulsory service for public purposes.

Question: What does article 23 state about the State imposing compulsory service for public purposes?
Answer: Article 23 states that nothing shall prevent the State from imposing compulsory service for public purposes.

Question: What is not required by the authority making a detention order as per clause (6)?
Answer: The authority making a detention order is not required to disclose facts which such authority considers to be against the public interest to disclose.

Question: What does the authority making a detention order consider to be against the public interest to disclose?
Answer: The authority making a detention order considers the facts which are not required by clause (6) to be against the public interest to disclose.

Question: What is prohibited in terms of employment of children?
Answer: No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.

Question: What is the minimum age for a child to be legally employed in any factory, mine or other hazardous employment?
Answer: The minimum age for a child to be legally employed in any factory, mine or other hazardous employment is fourteen years.

Question: What are persons entitled to in terms of religion?
Answer: All persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.

Question: What rights are all persons equally entitled to with regard to religion?
Answer: All persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.

Question: What can the State regulate or restrict in relation to religion?
Answer: The State can regulate or restrict any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice.

Question: What types of activities associated with religious practice can the State regulate or restrict?
Answer: The State can regulate or restrict any economic, financial, political or other secular activity associated with religious practice.

Question: What rights does every religious denomination or any section thereof have?
Answer: Every religious denomination or any section thereof has the right to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes, manage its own affairs in matters of religion, own and acquire movable and immovable property, and administer such property in accordance with law.

Question: What can a religious denomination or any section thereof do with the right they have?
Answer: Every religious denomination or any section thereof has the right to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes, manage its own affairs in matters of religion, own and acquire movable and immovable property, and administer such property in accordance with law.

Question: What is the rule regarding payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion?
Answer: No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are used for the promotion of any particular religion.

Question: Are individuals required to pay taxes that are utilized for promoting a specific religion?
Answer: No, no person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are used for the promotion of any particular religion.

Question: What does clause 28 state about religious instruction in state-funded educational institutions?
Answer: Clause 28 states that no religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State funds. However, this does not apply to an institution administered by the State but established under any endowment or trust which requires religious instruction. No person attending such an institution shall be required to take part in any religious instruction or to attend any religious worship unless they or their guardian has given consent.

Question: What does Clause 28 state about providing religious instruction in educational institutions funded solely by the State, and what exceptions are there to this rule?
Answer: Clause 28 states that no religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State funds. Exceptions to this rule include institutions administered by the State but established under any endowment or trust which requires religious instruction. Additionally, no person attending such an institution shall be required to take part in any religious instruction or to attend any religious worship unless they or their guardian has given consent.

Question: What rights are mentioned in section 29 regarding minorities and educational institutions?
Answer: Section 29 protects the interests of minorities by stating that any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same. Additionally, no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

Question: What does section 29 state about the rights of citizens with a distinct language, script, or culture and their admission into educational institutions?
Answer: Section 29 protects the interests of minorities by stating that any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same. Furthermore, no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

Question: What is the right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions according to section 30?
Answer: According to section 30, all minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.

Question: Who are granted the rights to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice according to section 30?
Answer: All minorities, whether based on religion or language, are granted the rights to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice according to section 30.

Question: What provision is made for the compulsory acquisition of property of an educational institution established by a minority?
Answer: In the event of compulsory acquisition of any property of an educational institution established and administered by a minority, the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under clause (1).

Question: What should the State ensure in the event of compulsory acquisition of any property of an educational institution established and administered by a minority?
Answer: The State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under clause (1).

Question: Can the State discriminate against any educational institution on the basis of it being managed by a minority?
Answer: No, the State shall not discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.

Question: Is it permitted for the State to discriminate against an educational institution based on whether it is managed by a minority, whether based on religion or language?
Answer: No, the State is not allowed to discriminate against any educational institution on the basis that it is under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.

Question: What does the law provide for the acquisition of estates and rights therein by the State?
Answer: The law provides for the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights.

Question: What does the law say about the State's ability to acquire any estate or any rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights?
Answer: The law provides for the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights.

Question: Under what conditions can the state take over the management of any property?
Answer: The State can take over the management of any property for a limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure the proper management of the property.

Question: For what reasons and for how long can the State take over the management of any property?
Answer: The State can take over the management of any property for a limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure the proper management of the property.

Question: When can the rights of managing agents, secretaries, treasurers, directors or managers of corporations be extinguished or modified?
Answer: The rights of managing agents, secretaries, treasurers, managing directors, directors or managers of corporations can be extinguished or modified by law.

Question: How can the rights of managing agents, secretaries, treasurers, managing directors, directors or managers of corporations be extinguished or modified?
Answer: The rights of these positions can be extinguished or modified by law.

Question: What is the provision for the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral oil?
Answer: The law provides for the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature termination or cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence.

Question: What does the law say about the premature termination or cancellation of any agreement, lease or licence for searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral oil?
Answer: The law provides for the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature termination or cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence.

Question: When does the provisions of this article not apply to a law made by the Legislature of a State?
Answer: The provisions of this article do not apply to a law made by the Legislature of a State unless such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent.

Question: In what condition does the provisions of this article apply to a law made by the Legislature of a State?
Answer: The provisions of this article apply to a law made by the Legislature of a State only if such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent.

Question: What is the condition for the State to acquire any portion of personal cultivation land, according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The state can acquire any portion of such land only if the law relating to the acquisition of such land, building or structure, provides for payment of compensation at a rate which shall not be less than the market value thereof.

Question: What does the law state about the compensation for personal cultivation land acquired by the state, according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The law states that the state can acquire any portion of personal cultivation land only if it provides for payment of compensation at a rate which shall not be less than the market value of the land.

Question: How is the term 'estate' defined in the constitution of India?
Answer: The term 'estate' is defined as having the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the existing law relating to land tenures in that area. It shall also include any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant, any land held under ryotwari settlement, and any land held or let for purposes of agriculture or for purposes ancillary thereto, including waste land, forest land, land for pasture or sites of buildings and other structures occupied by cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and village artisans.

Question: What does the term 'estate' include as per the constitution of India?
Answer: The term 'estate' includes any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant, any land held under ryotwari settlement, and any land held or let for purposes of agriculture or for purposes ancillary thereto, including waste land, forest land, land for pasture or sites of buildings and other structures occupied by cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and village artisans.

Question: What is included in the term 'rights' related to an estate according to the Indian constitution?
Answer: The term 'rights' in relation to an estate, shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor, under-proprietor, tenureholder, raiyat, under-raiyat or other intermediary and any rights or privileges in respect of land revenue.

Question: Who are the potential holders of 'rights' in relation to an estate according to the Indian constitution and what does these rights include?
Answer: The potential holders of 'rights' in relation to an estate according to the Indian constitution may include a proprietor, sub-proprietor, under-proprietor, tenureholder, raiyat, under-raiyat or other intermediary. These rights include any rights or privileges in respect of land revenue.

Question: What does article 31B in the constitution of India state about certain Acts and Regulations?
Answer: Article 31B states that none of the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of its provisions shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void, on the ground that such Act, Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part.

Question: What does the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution and its provisions being inconsistent with, taking away or abridging any of the rights conferred by any provisions of this Part imply according to a certain article?
Answer: According to Article 31B, it implies that none of the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of its provisions shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void.

Question: What does the Constitution of India state about laws giving effect to certain directive principles?
Answer: According to the Constitution of India, notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing any of the principles laid down in Part IV shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by article 14 or article 19. Additionally, no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to such policy.

Question: What does the Constitution of India say about the validity and the possibility of questioning in court of laws that aim to secure the principles laid down in Part IV, especially in relation to article 14 and article 19?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that no law giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing any of the principles laid down in Part IV shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by article 14 or article 19. It also adds that no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to such policy.

Question: What is the provision if such law is made by the Legislature of a State?
Answer: If such law is made by the Legislature of a State, the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent.

Question: What happens if a law made by the Legislature of a State has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent?
Answer: If such law is made by the Legislature of a State and has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto.

Question: What is stated in the Constitution of India about the right to Constitutional Remedies?
Answer: The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed. The Supreme Court has power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part. Additionally, without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court, Parliament may by law empower any other court to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by the Supreme Court.

Question: What powers does the Supreme Court and Parliament have for the enforcement of rights conferred in the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Supreme Court has the right to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred in the Constitution. Parliament can also empower any other court to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by the Supreme Court.

Question: What happens to the rights guaranteed by the article as per the Constitution?
Answer: The rights guaranteed by the article shall not be suspended except as otherwise provided for by the Constitution.

Question: Are the rights guaranteed by the article according to the Constitution ever suspended?
Answer: Yes, the rights guaranteed by the article can be suspended, but only as otherwise provided for by the Constitution.

Question: What power does the Parliament have in relation to the rights conferred by this Part according to Article 33 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to certain groups like the members of the Armed Forces, Forces charged with the maintenance of public order, persons employed for intelligence or counter intelligence or telecommunication systems related to these groups, be restricted or abrogated to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them.

Question: What groups can the Parliament, by law, restrict or abrogate the rights conferred by a Part of the Constitution to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them, according to Article 33 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: Parliament may restrict or abrogate the rights conferred by this Part to certain groups like the members of the Armed Forces, Forces charged with the maintenance of public order, persons employed for intelligence or counter intelligence or telecommunication systems related to these groups.

Question: What is the provision under Article 34 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: Article 34 states that, notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service of the Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area within the territory.

Question: Which Article of the Indian Constitution allows Parliament to indemnify any person in the service of the Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area within the territory?
Answer: This is provisioned under Article 34 of the Indian Constitution.

Question: What was declared invalid by the Supreme Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. and others vs. Union of India and others?
Answer: Section 4 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 was declared invalid by the Supreme Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. and others vs. Union of India and others.

Question: In which court case was Section 4 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 declared invalid?
Answer: Section 4 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 was declared invalid in the case of Minerva Mills Ltd. and others vs. Union of India and others.

Question: What was the conclusion of the Supreme Court in the case of Kesavananda Bharati vs. the State of Kerala?
Answer: In Kesavananda Bharati vs. the State of Kerala, the Supreme Court held the provisions in italics to be invalid.

Question: Which provisions did the Supreme Court hold to be invalid in the case of Kesavananda Bharati vs. the State of Kerala?
Answer: The Supreme Court held the provisions in italics to be invalid in Kesavananda Bharati vs. the State of Kerala.

Question: Who has the power to make laws with respect to the matters under clause (3) of article 16, clause (3) of article 32, article 33 and article 34?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What entity is responsible for making laws with respect to the matters under clause (3) of article 16, clause (3) of article 32, article 33 and article 34?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What will happen to any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in the territory of India with respect to any of the matters referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a)?
Answer: It shall continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by Parliament.

Question: What will occur to a law in force prior to the commencement of the Constitution in India concerning matters in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) until it is altered, repealed, or amended by Parliament?
Answer: It shall continue in force.

Question: What does the term 'the State' refer to in Part IV of the Constitution?
Answer: The term 'the State' has the same meaning as in Part III.

Question: In which part of the Constitution does 'the State' have the same meaning as in Part IV?
Answer: Part III

Question: Can the provisions contained in Part IV of the Constitution be enforceable by any court?
Answer: No

Question: Is it true that no court can enforce the provisions contained in Part IV of the Constitution?
Answer: Yes

Question: What is the duty of the State according to the principles laid down in Part IV of the Constitution?
Answer: It shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws.

Question: What should the State do with the principles laid down in Part IV of the Constitution when making laws?
Answer: It shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws.

Question: What is the aim of the State according to Article 38 of the Constitution?
Answer: The State shall strive to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people.

Question: Which article of the Constitution states that the State should strive to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people?
Answer: Article 38

Question: What is the responsibility of the State in securing a social order?
Answer: The State is responsible for securing and protecting a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, informs all the institutions of national life.

Question: What is the State securing and protecting in the national life institutions?
Answer: The State is securing and protecting a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, informs all the institutions of national life.

Question: What should the State strive to minimise?
Answer: The State should strive to minimise the inequalities in income, status, facilities and opportunities amongst individuals and groups of people.

Question: What should be minimised by the State to ensure equality amongst individuals and groups of people?
Answer: The inequalities in income, status, facilities and opportunities should be minimised by the State.

Question: What is the State's policy towards securing citizens' rights?
Answer: The State's policy includes securing the right to an adequate livelihood for both men and women, ensuring equal pay for equal work, protecting the health and strength of workers, and ensuring that children are given opportunities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity.

Question: What does the state's policy include in terms of securing citizens' rights?
Answer: The State's policy includes securing the right to an adequate livelihood for both men and women, ensuring equal pay for equal work, protecting the health and strength of workers, and ensuring that children are given opportunities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity.

Question: What is the State's policy on the distribution of material resources?
Answer: The State's policy is that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are distributed in a way that best serves the common good, and that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.

Question: How are the ownership and control of the material resources of the community distributed according to the State's policy, and how does the operation of the economic system affect the concentration of wealth and means of production?
Answer: The State's policy is that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are distributed in a way that best serves the common good, and that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.

Question: What is the role of the State in promoting justice in the legal system?
Answer: The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall provide free legal aid to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen due to economic or other disabilities.

Question: What are the responsibilities of the State in ensuring equal opportunity and access to the legal system for all citizens, including those with economic or other disabilities?
Answer: The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall provide free legal aid to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen due to economic or other disabilities.

Question: What is the responsibility of the State in terms of village panchayats?
Answer: The State is responsible for the organisation of village panchayats.

Question: Who is responsible for the organisation of village panchayats?
Answer: The State is responsible for the organisation of village panchayats.

Question: What powers are given to village panchayats?
Answer: Village panchayats are endowed with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.

Question: Who are endowed with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government?
Answer: Village panchayats are endowed with these powers.

Question: What are the state's responsibilities regarding work, education and public assistance?
Answer: The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.

Question: What does the State commit to provide, within its economic capacity and development, in terms of work, education and public assistance?
Answer: The State commits to make effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.

Question: What is the state's obligation towards working conditions and maternity relief?
Answer: The State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.

Question: What provisions should the State make for work conditions and maternity relief?
Answer: The State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.

Question: What should the state secure for all workers?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities.

Question: What measures should the State take to ensure the welfare of all workers, be they agricultural, industrial or otherwise?
Answer: The State should endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities.

Question: What is the state's role in promoting cottage industries?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis in rural areas.

Question: Where should the State endeavour to promote cottage industries and how?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis in rural areas.

Question: What is the state's role in workers' participation in management?
Answer: The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure the participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or other organisations engaged in any industry.

Question: How does the State secure the participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or other organisations engaged in any industry?
Answer: The state's role in workers' participation in management is to take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure this participation.

Question: What is the state's responsibility towards co-operative societies?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to promote voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of co-operative societies.

Question: What does the State endeavour to promote for co-operative societies?
Answer: The State endeavours to promote voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of co-operative societies.

Question: What is the state's duty regarding a uniform civil code?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.

Question: What is the state's responsibility towards securing a uniform civil code for its citizens?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.

Question: What is the state's obligation towards early childhood care and education?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years.

Question: Until what age should the State endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years.

Question: What is the State's responsibility towards the educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.

Question: What shall the State do to protect the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections from social injustice and all forms of exploitation according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.

Question: What is the State's duty regarding the level of nutrition, standard of living and public health according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health.

Question: What does the Constitution of India mandate about raising the level of nutrition, standard of living and improvement of public health, and the prohibition of consumption of intoxicating drinks and injurious drugs?
Answer: The Constitution of India mandates that the State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties. Specifically, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health.

Question: What is the State's role in agriculture and animal husbandry according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.

Question: What actions should the State take to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.

Question: What is the State's duty regarding the environment, forests and wildlife according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.

Question: What should the State endeavour to do for the environment, forests and wildlife of the country according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State's duty is to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.

Question: What is the State's obligation towards monuments, places and objects of national importance according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance, from spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.

Question: What does the Constitution of India declare about the State's responsibility towards the protection of monuments, places and objects of artistic or historic interest of national importance?
Answer: It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance, from spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.

Question: What does the Constitution of India say about the separation of judiciary from executive?
Answer: The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.

Question: What does the State need to do in the public services of the State according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive.

Question: What is the State's role in promoting international peace and security according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The State shall promote international peace and security.

Question: What is the responsibility of the State according to the Constitution of India in terms of international peace and security?
Answer: The State shall promote international peace and security.

Question: What are the duties that every citizen of India must perform?
Answer: Abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem; Cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom; Uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; Defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so; Promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India; Renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women; Value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture; Protect and improve the natural environment; Develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform; Safeguard public property and to abjure violence; Strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity; Provide opportunities for education to his child or ward between the age of six and fourteen years if they are a parent or guardian.

Question: What does it mean to be a citizen of India, in terms of duties and responsibilities?
Answer: Being a citizen of India involves duties such as abiding by the Constitution and respecting its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem; cherishing and following the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom; upholding and protecting the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; defending the country and rendering national service when called upon to do so; promoting harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India; renouncing practices derogatory to the dignity of women; valuing and preserving the rich heritage of our composite culture; protecting and improving the natural environment; developing the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform; safeguarding public property and to abjure violence; striving towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity; providing opportunities for education to his child or ward between the age of six and fourteen years if they are a parent or guardian.

Question: What is the role of the President of India in the Union?
Answer: The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers.

Question: Who is vested with the executive power of the Union and how is it exercised?
Answer: The executive power of the Union is vested in the President of India and it is exercised by him either directly or through officers.

Question: What are the objectives promoted by the endeavour?
Answer: International peace and security; Just and honourable relations between nations; Respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another; Encouragement of settlement of international disputes by arbitration.

Question: What is promoted by the endeavour that aims to encourage international peace and security, just and honourable relations between nations, respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another, and the settlement of international disputes by arbitration?
Answer: The objectives

Question: Who holds the supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union according to the constitution?
Answer: The President

Question: What position, according to the constitution, holds the supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union?
Answer: The President

Question: How is the President elected?
Answer: The President is elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

Question: Who elects the President?
Answer: The President is elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

Question: What does 'State' include in the articles mentioning the election of the President?
Answer: 'State' includes the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of Pondicherry.

Question: Which territories does 'State' refer to in the articles mentioning the election of the President?
Answer: 'State' refers to the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of Pondicherry.

Question: How is uniformity in representation secured in the election of the President?
Answer: Uniformity is secured by determining the number of votes each elected member of Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such election in a specific manner.

Question: How is the number of votes each elected member of Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly of each State determined at the election of the President?
Answer: The number of votes is determined in a specific manner to ensure uniformity in representation.

Question: How many votes does every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State have?
Answer: Every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall have as many votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient obtained by dividing the population of the State by the total number of the elected members of the Assembly.

Question: How are the votes of each elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State calculated?
Answer: The votes of each elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State are calculated as many times as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient obtained by dividing the population of the State by the total number of the elected members of the Assembly.

Question: How is the number of votes for each elected member of either House of Parliament calculated?
Answer: The number of votes for each elected member of either House of Parliament is obtained by dividing the total number of votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States under sub-clauses (a) and (b) by the total number of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half being counted as one and other fractions being disregarded.

Question: What happens to the fractions after dividing the total number of votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States by the total number of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament?
Answer: Fractions exceeding one-half are counted as one and other fractions are disregarded.

Question: In what manner is the election of the President held?
Answer: The election of the President is held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.

Question: What is the system in accordance with which the President's election is held, and how is the voting conducted?
Answer: The President's election is held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election is by secret ballot.

Question: What does the term 'population' refer to in this article?
Answer: In this article, the term 'population' refers to the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Question: What does the term 'population' in this article refer to as ascertained from the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published?
Answer: In this article, the term 'population' refers to the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Question: What is the duration of the term of office of the President?
Answer: The term of office of the President is five years from the date he enters upon his office.

Question: When does the term of office of the President start?
Answer: The term of office of the President starts from the date he enters upon his office.

Question: How can the President resign his office?
Answer: The President can resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Vice-President.

Question: Who is the President's resignation letter addressed to?
Answer: The President's resignation letter is addressed to the Vice-President.

Question: Who is eligible for re-election as President?
Answer: A person who holds, or who has held, office as President is eligible for re-election, subject to the other provisions of this Constitution.

Question: Who, according to the Constitution, can be re-elected as President?
Answer: A person who holds, or who has held, office as President.

Question: What are the qualifications for election as President according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: A person must be a citizen of India, must have completed the age of thirty-five years, and must be qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.

Question: What are the requirements for a citizen of India to be eligible for election as a member of the House of the People?
Answer: The person must have completed the age of thirty-five years and must be qualified for election as President according to the Constitution of India.

Question: Who is not eligible for election as President according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: A person holding any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments is not eligible.

Question: Who is considered ineligible to run for President due to holding an office of profit under the Government of India, any State Government, or any local or other authority under these governments' control?
Answer: A person holding any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments is considered ineligible for election as President according to the Constitution of India.

Question: What happens if a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State is elected President?
Answer: He shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as President.

Question: What is deemed to happen to the seat of a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State when they are elected and enter upon their office as President?
Answer: He shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as President.

Question: Can the President hold any other office of profit?
Answer: No, the President shall not hold any other office of profit.

Question: Is the President allowed to hold any other office of profit?
Answer: No, the President is not allowed to hold any other office of profit.

Question: What are the conditions of the President's office?
Answer: The President shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State. The President shall not hold any other office of profit. The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of his official residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law. The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be diminished during his term of office.

Question: Can the President be a member of either House of Parliament, or hold an additional office of profit, and what are his entitlements concerning official residences and emoluments?
Answer: The President shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State. The President shall not hold any other office of profit. The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of his official residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law. The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be diminished during his term of office.

Question: What must every President and every person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President do before entering upon his office?
Answer: They must make and subscribe an oath or affirmation in the presence of the Chief Justice of India or, in his absence, another designated person.

Question: Who must be present when a President or person acting as President takes their oath or affirmation before entering office, and who steps in if that person is absent?
Answer: The Chief Justice of India must be present, or in his absence, another designated person.

Question: What is the oath or affirmation that the President of India must take?
Answer: "I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will faithfully execute the office of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of India."

Question: Who swears to 'faithfully execute the office of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of India'?
Answer: The President of India

Question: What is the procedure for the impeachment of the president of India according to the constitution?
Answer: A President can be impeached for violation of the Constitution. The charge can be preferred by either House of Parliament. The proposal to prefer such charge must be contained in a resolution which has been moved after at least fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the House. This resolution has to be passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House. The other House shall then investigate the charge or cause the charge to be investigated. If the charge is sustained, a resolution is passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House, removing the President from his office.

Question: What steps must be taken according to the constitution if a President of India is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution?
Answer: A charge can be preferred by either House of Parliament. The proposal to prefer such charge must be contained in a resolution which has been moved after at least fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the House. This resolution has to be passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House. The other House shall then investigate the charge or cause the charge to be investigated. If the charge is sustained, a resolution is passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House, removing the President from his office.

Question: When is the election held to fill a vacancy in the office of President?
Answer: The election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of the President is held as per the provisions of the Indian constitution, but the exact timeline is not specified in the provided text.

Question: What determines when an election to fill a presidential vacancy is held?
Answer: The election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of the President is held as per the provisions of the Indian constitution.

Question: When should an election be held to fill a vacancy in the office of President?
Answer: As soon as possible after, and in no case later than six months from, the date of occurrence of the vacancy.

Question: What is the latest time frame in which an election should be held following a vacancy in the office of President?
Answer: Six months from the date of occurrence of the vacancy.

Question: How long is the term of the person elected to fill the vacancy in the office of President?
Answer: Five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

Question: When does the term of the person elected to fill the vacancy in the office of President begin?
Answer: The term begins from the date on which he enters upon his office.

Question: Who is the ex officio Chairman of the Council of States?
Answer: The Vice-President.

Question: What position does the Vice-President hold in the Council of States?
Answer: The Vice-President is the ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.

Question: What happens when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the President?
Answer: He shall not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the Council of States.

Question: What are the restrictions on the Vice-President when he acts as President or discharges the functions of the President?
Answer: He shall not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the Council of States.

Question: Who acts as President in the event of a vacancy in the office of the President?
Answer: The Vice-President.

Question: What is the role of the Vice-President in the event of a vacancy in the office of the President?
Answer: The Vice-President acts as President.

Question: If the President is unable to discharge his functions due to absence, illness or any other cause, who discharges his functions?
Answer: The Vice-President.

Question: Who assumes the duties of the President if they are unable to discharge their functions due to absence, illness or any other cause?
Answer: The Vice-President.

Question: What does the Vice-President do during the period while he is acting as, or discharging the functions of, President?
Answer: The Vice-President shall discharge his functions until the date on which the President resumes his duties.

Question: Until when does the Vice-President discharge his functions when acting as, or discharging the functions of, President?
Answer: The Vice-President discharges his functions until the date on which the President resumes his duties.

Question: Who determines the emoluments, allowances and privileges of the Vice-President?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who is responsible for determining the emoluments, allowances, and privileges of the Vice-President in India?
Answer: Parliament

Question: How is the Vice-President elected?
Answer: By the members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

Question: Who elects the Vice-President and what system do they use?
Answer: The Vice-President is elected by members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament. They use the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

Question: Can the Vice-President be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State?
Answer: No

Question: Is it allowed for the Vice-President to be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State?
Answer: No

Question: What are the eligibility criteria for becoming Vice-President?
Answer: The person must be a citizen of India, must have completed the age of thirty-five years, and must be qualified for election as a member of the Council of States.

Question: Who is qualified for election as a member of the Council of States, is a citizen of India, and has completed the age of thirty-five years?
Answer: The person eligible to become the Vice-President

Question: What offices are considered an office of profit that would disqualify someone from being eligible for Vice-President?
Answer: Any office under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments.

Question: Which offices would disqualify someone from being eligible for Vice-President under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments?
Answer: Any office considered an office of profit would disqualify someone from being eligible for Vice-President.

Question: What is the term of office of the Vice-President?
Answer: Five years

Question: Which office in government has a term length of five years?
Answer: Vice-President

Question: Can a Vice-President resign? If so, how?
Answer: Yes, a Vice-President can resign by writing under his hand addressed to the President.

Question: Who should a Vice-President address his resignation letter to, if he decides to resign?
Answer: If a Vice-President decides to resign, he should address his resignation letter to the President.

Question: How can a Vice-President be removed from his office?
Answer: A Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council and agreed to by the House of the People. However, no resolution for this purpose shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given.

Question: What is the procedure and conditions for passing a resolution to remove a Vice-President from his office?
Answer: To remove a Vice-President from his office, a resolution needs to be passed by the Council of States with a majority of all the then members of the Council, and it must be agreed to by the House of the People. However, no resolution for this purpose can be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given.

Question: When should an election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President be held?
Answer: An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President should be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy.

Question: When should an election be held after the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Vice-President?
Answer: An election should be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy.

Question: What is the term of office for a person elected to fill a casual vacancy in the office of Vice-President?
Answer: The person elected to fill a casual vacancy in the office of Vice-President is entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

Question: How long is the full term of office for a person who is elected to fill a casual vacancy in the office of Vice-President from the date they enter office?
Answer: The full term of office for a person elected to fill a casual vacancy in the office of Vice-President is five years.

Question: What is the oath taken by the Vice-President before entering upon his office?
Answer: "I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and solemnly affirm allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter."

Question: Who says 'I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and solemnly affirm allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter' before taking office?
Answer: The Vice-President

Question: What provisions can the Parliament make regarding the President's functions?
Answer: Parliament may make such provisions as it thinks fit for the discharge of the functions of the President in any contingency not provided for in this Chapter.

Question: In what situations can Parliament make provisions for the discharge of the President's functions?
Answer: Parliament may make provisions for the discharge of the President's functions in any contingency not provided for in this Chapter.

Question: Who decides on doubts and disputes arising out of the election of a President or Vice-President?
Answer: The Supreme Court

Question: What body is responsible for deciding on doubts and disputes arising out of the election of a President or Vice-President?
Answer: The Supreme Court

Question: What happens if the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared void by the Supreme Court?
Answer: Acts done by him in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of the office of President or Vice-President, on or before the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.

Question: What is the status of the acts done by a person in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of the office of President or Vice-President, on or before the date of a Supreme Court decision declaring their election void?
Answer: Those acts will not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.

Question: Can the election of a person as President or Vice-President be called into question based on any vacancy among the members of the electoral college electing him?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible to question the election of a person as President or Vice-President based on a vacancy among the members of the electoral college electing him?
Answer: No

Question: Who has the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence?
Answer: The President

Question: In which cases can the President grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or suspend, remit or commute the sentence?
Answer: In cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial, where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, and where the sentence is a sentence of death.

Question: What are the specific situations where the President can grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or suspend, remit or commute the sentence?
Answer: The President can grant such leniencies in cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial, where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, and where the sentence is a sentence of death.

Question: Does sub-clause (a) of clause (1) affect the power conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial?
Answer: No

Question: Does sub-clause (a) of clause (1) not affect the power conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial?
Answer: Yes

Question: Does sub-clause (c) of clause (1) affect the power to suspend, remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor of a State under any law for the time being in force?
Answer: No

Question: Is the power to suspend, remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor of a State under any law for the time being in force unaffected by sub-clause (c) of clause (1)?
Answer: Yes

Question: To what extent does the executive power of the Union extend according to the Indian constitution?
Answer: The executive power of the Union extends to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws, and to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are exercisable by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or agreement.

Question: What are the areas where the executive power of the Union extends according to the Indian constitution?
Answer: The executive power of the Union extends to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws, and to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are exercisable by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or agreement.

Question: Who can exercise executive power in matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for a State?
Answer: A State and any officer or authority of a State can exercise executive power in matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for that State, unless otherwise provided by Parliament.

Question: Who can exercise executive power in matters where Parliament has the ability to create laws for a specific State, unless otherwise stated by Parliament?
Answer: A State and any officer or authority of that State can exercise executive power in these matters.

Question: Who aids and advises the President according to the Indian constitution?
Answer: The Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head aids and advises the President.

Question: Who is at the head of the Council of Ministers that aids and advises the President according to the Indian constitution?
Answer: The Prime Minister is at the head of the Council of Ministers that aids and advises the President.

Question: What happens if the President requires the Council of Ministers to reconsider their advice?
Answer: The President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.

Question: What should the President do in accordance with the advice tendered after asking the Council of Ministers to reconsider their advice?
Answer: The President shall act upon it.

Question: Can the advice tendered by Ministers to the President be inquired into in any court?
Answer: No, the question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.

Question: Is it possible for any court to inquire into what advice was tendered by Ministers to the President?
Answer: No, it is not possible for any court to inquire into what advice was tendered by Ministers to the President.

Question: Who appoints the Prime Minister and other Ministers in India?
Answer: The Prime Minister is appointed by the President and the other Ministers are appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.

Question: Who appoints the Prime Minister and by whose advice are the other Ministers appointed in India?
Answer: The Prime Minister is appointed by the President and the other Ministers are appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.

Question: What is the maximum number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers?
Answer: The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent of the total.

Question: What is the limit on the total number of Ministers in the Council of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in relation to the total?
Answer: The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent of the total.

Question: Who disqualifies a member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party?
Answer: The member is disqualified under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution of India.

Question: Under which part of the Constitution of India is a member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party disqualified?
Answer: The member is disqualified under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule.

Question: What happens when a member of either House of Parliament is disqualified?
Answer: The member is also disqualified to be appointed as a Minister for the duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member would expire or where he contests any election to either House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier.

Question: What are the consequences for a member of either House of Parliament who gets disqualified in terms of their eligibility to be appointed as a Minister?
Answer: The member is also disqualified to be appointed as a Minister for the duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member would expire or where he contests any election to either House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier.

Question: Who does the Council of Ministers hold responsibility to?
Answer: The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People.

Question: Who is the House of the People collectively responsible for?
Answer: The House of the People is collectively responsible for the Council of Ministers.

Question: Who administers the oaths of office and of secrecy to a Minister before he enters upon his office?
Answer: The President administers the oaths of office and of secrecy to a Minister before he enters upon his office.

Question: Who does the President administer the oaths of office and of secrecy to before they enter upon their office?
Answer: The President administers the oaths of office and of secrecy to a Minister before he enters upon his office.

Question: What happens if a Minister is not a member of either House of Parliament for any period of six consecutive months?
Answer: A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.

Question: What will be the result at the expiration of six consecutive months, if a Minister is not a member of either House of Parliament during that period?
Answer: The Minister shall cease to be a Minister.

Question: Who determines the salaries and allowances of Ministers?
Answer: The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament may from time to time by law determine.

Question: What is the process for determining the salaries and allowances of Ministers?
Answer: The salaries and allowances of Ministers are determined by Parliament, which may from time to time make changes by law.

Question: Who appoints the Attorney-General for India?
Answer: The President appoints the Attorney-General for India.

Question: Who does the President appoint for India?
Answer: The President appoints the Attorney-General for India.

Question: What is the duty of the Attorney-General of India?
Answer: It is the duty of the Attorney-General to give advice to the Government of India upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by the President, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.

Question: Who gives advice to the Government of India on legal matters, performs other duties of a legal character that may be referred or assigned to him by the President, and discharges the functions conferred on him by or under the Constitution or any other law?
Answer: The Attorney-General of India

Question: Who holds the right of audience in all courts in the territory of India?
Answer: The Attorney-General

Question: In which territory does the Attorney-General hold the right of audience in all courts?
Answer: India

Question: Who determines the remuneration of the Attorney-General?
Answer: The President

Question: Who determines the remuneration of the Attorney-General?
Answer: The President

Question: In whose name is the executive action of the Government of India taken?
Answer: The President

Question: Whose name is the executive action of the Government of India taken in?
Answer: The President

Question: Who authenticates orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the President?
Answer: The President, as specified in rules to be made by the President

Question: Who is specified in the rules made by the President for authenticating orders and other instruments made and executed in his name?
Answer: The President

Question: Who makes rules for the convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India?
Answer: The President

Question: Who is responsible for making rules for the convenient transaction of the business of the Indian Government?
Answer: The President

Question: What are the duties of the Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President?
Answer: To communicate all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation; to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may call for; and to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.

Question: What responsibilities does the Prime Minister have in regards to communicating with the President and the Council of Ministers about the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation?
Answer: The Prime Minister is responsible for communicating all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation to the President. They are also required to provide any information that the President may ask for regarding these matters. Furthermore, if a Minister has made a decision on a matter that has not been considered by the Council, the Prime Minister must present it for their consideration.

Question: What does the Parliament for the Union consist of?
Answer: The President and two Houses known respectively as the Council of States and the House of the People.

Question: Who are the President and the two Houses known respectively as the Council of States and the House of the People part of?
Answer: They are part of the Parliament for the Union.

Question: What is the composition of the Council of States?
Answer: The Council of States shall consist of twelve members.

Question: How many members does the Council of States consist of?
Answer: The Council of States shall consist of twelve members.

Question: Who nominates the members under sub-clause (a) of clause (1)?
Answer: The President

Question: Who nominates the members under sub-clause (a) of clause (1)?
Answer: The President

Question: What are the qualifications of the members to be nominated by the President?
Answer: They shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as Literature, science, art and social service.

Question: Who should be the persons that the President nominates?
Answer: The President should nominate the persons who have special knowledge or practical experience in matters such as Literature, science, art and social service.

Question: How are the representatives of each State in the Council of States elected?
Answer: They shall be elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

Question: Who elects the representatives of each State in the Council of States and what system do they use?
Answer: The representatives of each State in the Council of States are elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State using the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

Question: How are the representatives of the Union territories in the Council of States chosen?
Answer: They shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.

Question: Who prescribes the method for choosing representatives of the Union territories in the Council of States?
Answer: The Parliament

Question: What is the composition of the House of the People?
Answer: Subject to the provisions of article 331, the House of the People shall consist of not more than five hundred and thirty members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States, and not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.

Question: How many members does the House of the People consist of and how are they chosen?
Answer: The House of the People consists of not more than five hundred and thirty members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States, and not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide, subject to the provisions of article 331.

Question: How are seats allotted to each State in the House of the People?
Answer: There shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House of the People in such manner that the ratio between that number and the population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all States.

Question: What does the ratio between the number of seats allotted to a State in the House of the People and the population of the State represent?
Answer: The ratio represents the manner in which seats are allotted to each State in the House of the People. It is arranged in such a way that, as far as practicable, the ratio is the same for all States.

Question: What does the term 'population' refer to in this context?
Answer: The term 'population' refers to the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Question: What does 'population' refer to when it is ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published?
Answer: In this context, the term 'population' refers to the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Question: What is the condition for a state to be exempted from the seat allocation provisions in the House of the People?
Answer: The state is exempted from the seat allocation provisions in the House of the People if its population does not exceed six millions.

Question: What is the population limit for a state to be exempted from the seat allocation provisions in the House of the People?
Answer: The population limit for a state to be exempted from the seat allocation provisions in the House of the People is six millions.

Question: What happens after the completion of each census?
Answer: Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.

Question: What is done by the Parliament by law in terms of seat allocation and territorial constituency division for each State after each census?
Answer: Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.

Question: When does the readjustment of the allocation of seats take effect?
Answer: The readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President may, by order, specify.

Question: Who has the authority to specify the date when the readjustment of the allocation of seats takes effect?
Answer: The President has the authority to specify the date when the readjustment takes effect.

Question: What is the reference for the purpose of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that clause until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published?
Answer: The reference is the 1971 census.

Question: Which census is used as the reference for the purpose of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that clause until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published?
Answer: The 1971 census is used as the reference.

Question: What is the reference for the purpose of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published?
Answer: The reference is the 2001 census.

Question: What census is the reference for the purpose of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published?
Answer: The 2001 census is the reference.

Question: What is the rule regarding the division of each State into territorial constituencies?
Answer: The division of each State into territorial constituencies may be readjusted on the basis of the 2001 census.

Question: On what basis may the division of each State into territorial constituencies be readjusted?
Answer: The division of each State into territorial constituencies may be readjusted on the basis of the 2001 census.

Question: What is the duration of the Council of States?
Answer: The Council of States shall not be subject to dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of every second year.

Question: What happens to the members of the Council of States every second year?
Answer: As nearly as possible one-third of the members of the Council of States retire.

Question: How long does the House of the People continue for?
Answer: The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting.

Question: What happens to the House of the People five years from the date appointed for its first meeting?
Answer: The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting.

Question: Can the period of the House of the People be extended?
Answer: Yes, the period may be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

Question: Under what conditions can the period of the House of the People be extended and for how long?
Answer: The period of the House of the People can be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

Question: What are the qualifications for membership of Parliament?
Answer: A person must be a citizen of India, make and subscribe an oath before some person authorised by the Election Commission, and possess other qualifications as prescribed by law. They must be at least thirty years of age for a seat in the Council of States, and at least twenty-five years of age for a seat in the House of the People.

Question: What is the minimum age requirement for a seat in the Council of States and the House of the People in the Indian Parliament?
Answer: The minimum age requirement for a seat in the Council of States is thirty years, and for a seat in the House of the People is twenty-five years.

Question: Who is responsible for summoning each House of Parliament?
Answer: The President is responsible for summoning each House of Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit.

Question: Who decides the time and place for each House of Parliament to meet?
Answer: The President decides the time and place for each House of Parliament to meet.

Question: What is the maximum amount of time that can pass between sessions of Parliament?
Answer: Six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first meeting in the next session.

Question: What does it mean when it is stated that 'Six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first meeting in the next session'?
Answer: It means that the maximum amount of time that can pass between sessions of Parliament is six months.

Question: What can the President do from time to time according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The President may prorogue the Houses or either House; dissolve the House of the People.

Question: Who has the constitutional authority in India to prorogue the Houses or either House, and dissolve the House of the People?
Answer: The President

Question: What is the right of the President to address and send messages to Houses according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The President may address either House of Parliament or both Houses assembled together, and for that purpose require the attendance of members. The President may also send messages to either House of Parliament, whether with respect to a Bill then pending in Parliament or otherwise.

Question: According to the constitution of India, how can the President communicate with either or both Houses of Parliament?
Answer: The President may address either House of Parliament or both Houses assembled together, and for that purpose require the attendance of members. The President may also send messages to either House of Parliament, whether with respect to a Bill then pending in Parliament or otherwise.

Question: What does the constitution of India stipulate about special addresses by the President?
Answer: At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the House of the People and at the commencement of the first session of each year the President shall address both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of the causes of its summons.

Question: When does the constitution of India say the President should address both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of the causes of its summons?
Answer: At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the House of the People and at the commencement of the first session of each year.

Question: What are the rights of Ministers and the Attorney-General as respects Houses according to the constitution of India?
Answer: Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, either House, any joint sitting of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this article be entitled to vote.

Question: Who in India has the right to speak in, and otherwise take part in the proceedings of, either House, any joint sitting of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which he may be named a member, but is not entitled to vote?
Answer: Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India

Question: Who is the Chairman of the Council of States according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The Vice- President of India shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.

Question: Who shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The Vice- President of India

Question: How is the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States chosen according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The Council of States shall, as soon as may be, choose a member of the Council to be Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member to be Deputy Chairman thereof.

Question: What happens when the office of the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States becomes vacant, according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The Council of States shall choose another member to be Deputy Chairman.

Question: Under what conditions does the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States vacate his office?
Answer: The Deputy Chairman of the Council of States shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council, if he resigns his office through a written note to the Chairman, or if he is removed from his office by a resolution of the Council passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council.

Question: What happens if the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States ceases to be a member of the Council, resigns his office through a written note to the Chairman, or is removed from his office by a resolution of the Council passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council?
Answer: The Deputy Chairman of the Council of States shall vacate his office.

Question: Who performs the duties of the Chairman when the office is vacant or the Vice-President is acting as President?
Answer: The duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Chairman, or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by such member of the Council of States as the President may appoint for the purpose.

Question: Who performs the duties of the Chairman when the office is vacant, the Vice-President is acting as President and the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant?
Answer: Such member of the Council of States as the President may appoint for the purpose performs the duties.

Question: Who acts as Chairman during the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council of States?
Answer: During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council of States the Deputy Chairman, or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.

Question: Who takes over the role of Chairman if both the Chairman and Deputy Chairman are absent from a sitting of the Council of States, and no person determined by the rules of procedure is present?
Answer: In such a scenario, such other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.

Question: Can the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman preside over a resolution for his removal from office?
Answer: No, the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman shall not preside over a resolution for his removal from office while it is under consideration.

Question: Who shall not preside over a resolution for their removal from office while it is under consideration?
Answer: The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman shall not preside over a resolution for their removal from office while it is under consideration.

Question: Who can speak and take part in the proceedings of the Council of States during a resolution for the removal of the Vice-President?
Answer: The Chairman

Question: Who is allowed to speak and take part in the proceedings of the Council of States during a resolution for the removal of the Vice-President?
Answer: The Chairman

Question: Can the Chairman vote on the resolution for the removal of the Vice-President?
Answer: No

Question: Is it true that the Chairman is not allowed to vote on the resolution for the removal of the Vice-President?
Answer: Yes

Question: Who does the House of the People choose as their representatives?
Answer: Speaker and Deputy Speaker

Question: What positions are chosen as representatives by the House of the People?
Answer: Speaker and Deputy Speaker

Question: When does a member vacate his office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of the People?
Answer: When he ceases to be a member of the House of the People, when he resigns his office, or when he is removed from his office by a resolution of the House of the People.

Question: What are the circumstances under which a Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of the People would vacate his office?
Answer: A Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of the People would vacate his office when he ceases to be a member of the House of the People, when he resigns his office, or when he is removed from his office by a resolution of the House of the People.

Question: How can a Speaker or Deputy Speaker resign their office?
Answer: By writing under his hand addressed to the Deputy Speaker if he is the Speaker, and to the Speaker if he is the Deputy Speaker.

Question: Who should a Speaker or Deputy Speaker address their resignation letter to?
Answer: The Speaker should address his resignation letter to the Deputy Speaker, and the Deputy Speaker should address his to the Speaker.

Question: What happens when the House of the People is dissolved?
Answer: The Speaker does not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the House of the People after the dissolution.

Question: When does the Speaker vacate his office in the event of the dissolution of the House of the People?
Answer: The Speaker does not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the House of the People after the dissolution.

Question: Who performs the duties of the office when the office of Speaker is vacant?
Answer: The Deputy Speaker or other person

Question: Who takes up the responsibilities when the Speaker's position becomes vacant?
Answer: The Deputy Speaker or other person

Question: Who performs the duties if the office of Deputy Speaker is vacant?
Answer: Such member of the House of the People as the President may appoint for the purpose.

Question: Who appoints a member of the House of the People to perform the duties when the office of Deputy Speaker is vacant?
Answer: The President

Question: Who acts as Speaker during the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the People?
Answer: The Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the House.

Question: Who steps in if both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are absent from any sitting of the House of the People?
Answer: Such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the House.

Question: Can the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration?
Answer: No, they shall not preside, even if they are present.

Question: If a resolution for their removal from office is under consideration, are the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker allowed to preside, even if they are present?
Answer: No, they shall not preside.

Question: Does the Speaker have the right to speak in the proceedings of the House while a resolution for his removal is under consideration?
Answer: Yes, the Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings.

Question: Who shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of the House while a resolution for his removal is under consideration?
Answer: The Speaker does have the right to speak in the proceedings of the House while a resolution for his removal is under consideration.

Question: Can the Speaker vote on the resolution for his removal?
Answer: Yes, he can vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

Question: When can the Speaker vote during proceedings, especially regarding a resolution for his removal?
Answer: The Speaker can vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

Question: Who determines the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker?
Answer: The salaries and allowances are fixed by Parliament by law.

Question: Who fixes the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker by law?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Does each house of parliament have its own secretarial staff?
Answer: Yes, each House of Parliament shall have a separate secretarial staff.

Question: Does each House of Parliament have a separate secretarial staff?
Answer: Yes, each house of parliament does have its own secretarial staff.

Question: Can posts be created that are common to both Houses of Parliament?
Answer: Yes, nothing in the clause prevents the creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament.

Question: Is there anything in the clause that prevents the creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament?
Answer: No, nothing in the clause prevents the creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament.

Question: Who may regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament?
Answer: Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament.

Question: Who regulates the recruitment and conditions of service for persons appointed to the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament?
Answer: Parliament regulates the recruitment and the conditions of service by law.

Question: Before taking his seat, what does every member of either House of Parliament have to do?
Answer: Every member of either House of Parliament shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the President, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

Question: Who should every member of either House of Parliament make and subscribe an oath or affirmation to before taking his seat, and where is the form for this process set out?
Answer: Every member of either House of Parliament should make and subscribe an oath or affirmation to the President before taking his seat, and the form for this process is set out in the Third Schedule.

Question: How are all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses determined?
Answer: All questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.

Question: Who determines the outcomes of all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses?
Answer: The outcomes are determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.

Question: Who has a casting vote in case of an equality of votes?
Answer: The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.

Question: Who shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes?
Answer: The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such

Question: Can either House of Parliament act despite any vacancy in the membership thereof?
Answer: Yes, either House of Parliament shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof.

Question: Who has the power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership?
Answer: Either House of Parliament has the power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership.

Question: Are proceedings in Parliament valid if it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled?
Answer: Yes, any proceedings in Parliament shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled.

Question: Are any proceedings in Parliament still valid even if it is discovered later that there was a person present who was not entitled?
Answer: Yes, any proceedings in Parliament shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled.

Question: What is the quorum to constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament?
Answer: The quorum to constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one-tenth of the total number of members of the House.

Question: What fraction of the total number of members of the House is needed to constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament?
Answer: One-tenth of the total number of members of the House is needed to constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament.

Question: What must the Chairman or Speaker do if there is no quorum during a meeting of a House?
Answer: If there is no quorum during a meeting of a House, it is the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, to either adjourn the House or suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Question: What is the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, when there is no quorum during a meeting of a House?
Answer: If there is no quorum during a meeting of a House, the Chairman or Speaker must either adjourn the House or suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Question: Can a person be a member of both Houses of Parliament?
Answer: No, a person shall not be a member of both Houses of Parliament.

Question: Is it possible for a person to be a member of both Houses of Parliament?
Answer: No, it is not possible for a person to be a member of both Houses of Parliament.

Question: Can a person be a member of Parliament and of a House of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: No, a person shall not be a member both of Parliament and of a House of the Legislature of a State.

Question: Is it possible for an individual to hold membership in both the Parliament and a House of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: No, it is not possible for an individual to hold membership in both the Parliament and a House of the Legislature of a State.

Question: When does a member's seat in Parliament become vacant?
Answer: A member's seat in Parliament becomes vacant if they become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102, or if they resign their seat and their resignation is accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker. Also, if a member of either House of Parliament is without permission of the House for a period of sixty days.

Question: What happens if a member of Parliament becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102, or resigns their seat and their resignation is accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, or is absent without the House's permission for sixty days?
Answer: A member's seat in Parliament becomes vacant.

Question: What happens if the Chairman or the Speaker feels that a resignation is not voluntary or genuine?
Answer: If the Chairman or the Speaker is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.

Question: What does the Chairman or the Speaker do if they believe a resignation is not voluntary or genuine?
Answer: If the Chairman or the Speaker is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.

Question: What happens if a member of the House is absent from all meetings for sixty days?
Answer: The House may declare his seat vacant.

Question: What can the House do if a member is absent from all meetings for sixty days?
Answer: The House may declare his seat vacant.

Question: Under what conditions is a person disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament?
Answer: A person is disqualified if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court, if he is an undischarged insolvent, if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State, or if he is disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.

Question: What happens if a person holds any office of profit under the Government of India or any State, is declared to be of unsound mind by a competent court, is an undischarged insolvent, is not a citizen of India, voluntarily acquires the citizenship of a foreign State, acknowledges allegiance or adherence to a foreign State, or is disqualified by any law made by Parliament?
Answer: The person is disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament.

Question: Who decides on questions regarding disqualifications of members?
Answer: The question is referred for the decision of the President and his decision is final. Before giving any decision, the President obtains the opinion of the Election Commission and acts according to such opinion.

Question: What is the process and who has the final say in decisions regarding disqualifications of members?
Answer: The question is referred for the decision of the President and his decision is final. Before giving any decision, the President obtains the opinion of the Election Commission and acts according to such opinion.

Question: What is the penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified?
Answer: The text does not provide specific penalty details.

Question: Does the text provide specific penalty details for sitting and voting before making an oath or affirmation under article 99, or when not qualified or disqualified?
Answer: No, the text does not provide specific penalty details.

Question: What penalty does a member of parliament face if he sits or votes without complying with the requirements of article 99 or if he is not qualified or is disqualified?
Answer: He shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.

Question: What is the penalty for a member of parliament who sits or votes without complying with the requirements of article 99, or if he is not qualified or disqualified, for each day he does so?
Answer: The penalty is five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.

Question: What freedoms are granted to members of the Houses of Parliament under the Constitution?
Answer: There shall be freedom of speech in Parliament. No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof.

Question: What does the Constitution say about the freedom of speech and legal protections for members of Parliament in relation to their speeches and votes?
Answer: The Constitution grants members of the Houses of Parliament freedom of speech and protects them from being liable to any proceedings in any court for anything they say or any vote they give in Parliament or any committee.

Question: How are the powers, privileges, and immunities of each House of Parliament and its members defined?
Answer: They shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament by law, and, until so defined, shall be those of that House and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into force of section 15 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.

Question: When were the powers, privileges, and immunities of each House of Parliament and its members last defined, and what will they be until they are next defined?
Answer: They were last defined by Parliament by law before the coming into force of section 15 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, and will remain those of that House and of its members and committees until they are next defined.

Question: What provisions are made for people who have the right to speak in, and otherwise take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament?
Answer: The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of Parliament.

Question: To whom do the provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) apply in the context of speaking in, and participating in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament or any committee thereof?
Answer: The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) apply to persons who by virtue of the Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament.

Question: What are members of either House of Parliament entitled to receive?
Answer: Members of either House of Parliament shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances.

Question: Who is entitled to receive salaries and allowances?
Answer: Members of either House of Parliament are entitled to receive salaries and allowances.

Question: What determines the allowances and conditions for members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India, according to the Constitution?
Answer: The allowances and conditions for members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India are determined by Parliament through law. If no provision is made, they follow the rates and conditions that were applicable before the commencement of the Constitution.

Question: Who determines the allowances and conditions for members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India if no provision is made, and what do they follow?
Answer: If no provision is made, the allowances and conditions for members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India are determined by Parliament through law, and they follow the rates and conditions that were applicable before the commencement of the Constitution.

Question: Where can a Bill originate in Parliament according to the Legislative Procedure?
Answer: A Bill may originate in either House of Parliament.

Question: In which house can a Bill originate according to the Legislative Procedure in Parliament?
Answer: A Bill may originate in either House of Parliament.

Question: When is a Bill considered passed by the Houses of Parliament?
Answer: A Bill is considered passed by the Houses of Parliament when it has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses.

Question: What does it mean when a Bill has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses?
Answer: It means that the Bill is considered passed by the Houses of Parliament.

Question: What happens to a Bill pending in Parliament if the Houses are prorogued?
Answer: A Bill pending in Parliament does not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses.

Question: Does a Bill pending in Parliament lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses?
Answer: No, a Bill pending in Parliament does not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses.

Question: Does a Bill lapse on the dissolution of the House of the People?
Answer: A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by the House of the People does not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People. However, a Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having been passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of States, shall lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.

Question: What happens to a Bill that is pending in the Council of States and has not been passed by the House of the People, or a Bill pending in the House of the People upon the dissolution of the House of the People?
Answer: A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by the House of the People does not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People. However, a Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having been passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of States, shall lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.

Question: What happens if a Bill has been passed by one House but is rejected by the other?
Answer: If a Bill is rejected by the other House, or the Houses have finally disagreed on the amendments to be made in the Bill, or more than six months elapse from the date of the reception of the Bill by the other House without the Bill being passed by it, the President may notify to the Houses his intention to summon them to meet.

Question: What can the President do if a Bill is rejected by one House, the Houses disagree on the amendments, or more than six months pass without the Bill being passed?
Answer: The President may notify to the Houses his intention to summon them to meet.

Question: What happens when the President notifies his intention of summoning the Houses to meet in a joint sitting?
Answer: Neither House shall proceed further with the Bill, but the President may at any time after the date of his notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose specified in the notification. If he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.

Question: What is the procedure if the President notifies his intention of summoning the Houses to meet in a joint sitting?
Answer: Upon the President's notification of his intention to summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting, neither House shall proceed further with the Bill. However, the President may at any time after the date of his notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose specified in the notification. If he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.

Question: What conditions must be met for a Bill to be deemed as passed by both Houses at a joint sitting?
Answer: The Bill, with such amendments, if any, as are agreed to in joint sitting, must be passed by a majority of the total number of members of both Houses present and voting.

Question: What does it mean for a Bill to be passed by a majority of the total number of members of both Houses present and voting, with such amendments, if any, as are agreed to in the joint sitting?
Answer: It means that the Bill is deemed as passed by both Houses at a joint sitting.

Question: What kind of amendments can be proposed to a Bill at a joint sitting?
Answer: If the Bill has been passed by one House and not been passed by the other House with amendments and returned to the House in which it originated, no amendment shall be proposed to the Bill other than such amendments as are made necessary by the delay in the passage of the Bill. If the Bill has been so passed and returned, only such amendments as aforesaid shall be proposed to the Bill and such other amendments as are relevant to the matters with respect to which the Houses have not agreed.

Question: What are the conditions under which amendments can be proposed to a Bill during a joint sitting, when the Bill has been passed by one House but not by the other with amendments and returned to the House where it originated?
Answer: No amendment shall be proposed to the Bill other than such amendments as are made necessary by the delay in the passage of the Bill. If the Bill has been so passed and returned, only such amendments as aforesaid shall be proposed to the Bill and such other amendments as are relevant to the matters with respect to which the Houses have not agreed.

Question: Who has the final decision on the amendments that are admissible under this clause?
Answer: The decision of the person presiding as to the amendments which are admissible under this clause shall be final.

Question: What is the role of the person presiding in terms of the admissibility of amendments under this clause?
Answer: The person presiding has the final decision on the amendments that are admissible under this clause.

Question: Can a joint sitting be held and a Bill passed even if there has been a dissolution of the House of the People?
Answer: Yes, a joint sitting may be held under this article and a Bill passed thereat, notwithstanding that a dissolution of the House of the People has intervened since the President notified his intention to summon the Houses.

Question: Can a joint sitting and the passing of a Bill occur under the article, even after a dissolution of the House of the People and the President has notified his intention to summon the Houses?
Answer: Yes, a joint sitting can be held and a Bill can be passed even after a dissolution of the House of the People.

Question: Where can a Money Bill not be introduced according to special procedure?
Answer: A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States.

Question: In which house of the parliament shall a Money Bill not be introduced according to special procedure?
Answer: The Council of States

Question: What happens after a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People?
Answer: It shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations.

Question: What is the procedure once the Council of States receives a Money Bill passed by the House of the People?
Answer: The Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations.

Question: What happens if the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of States?
Answer: The Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of the People.

Question: What is deemed to have happened when the Money Bill has amendments recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of the People?
Answer: If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses.

Question: What happens if the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the Council of States?
Answer: The Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the Council of States.

Question: What is the outcome when the Money Bill is passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the Council of States?
Answer: If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People.

Question: What happens if a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to the Council of States is not returned within the said period of fourteen days?
Answer: It shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People.

Question: What is considered when a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to the Council of States is not returned within fourteen days?
Answer: It shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People.

Question: What is the definition of a Money Bill?
Answer: A Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken.

Question: What does a Bill need to contain to be deemed a Money Bill?
Answer: A Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken.

Question: What is the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India?
Answer: The custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India refers to the management and safekeeping of these funds, including the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund.

Question: What does the management and safekeeping of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India involve?
Answer: The management and safekeeping of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, also known as their custody, involves the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund.

Question: What is the purpose of the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India is for the purpose of funding various expenditures of the government.

Question: What is funded by the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: Various expenditures of the government are funded by the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: Who has the final say on whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not?
Answer: The Speaker of the House of the People has the final say on whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not.

Question: Who decides if a Bill is a Money Bill in the House of the People?
Answer: The Speaker of the House of the People has the final say on whether a Bill is a Money Bill.

Question: What happens when a Bill is passed by the Houses of Parliament in India?
Answer: When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament, it is presented to the President, who then declares either that he assents to the Bill, or that he withholds assent therefrom.

Question: What does the President of India do after a Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament?
Answer: After a Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament in India, it is presented to the President, who then declares either that he assents to the Bill, or that he withholds assent therefrom.

Question: What can the President do if presented with a Bill for assent that is not a Money Bill?
Answer: The President may, as soon as possible after the presentation to him of a Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill to the Houses with a message requesting that they will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions.

Question: What action can the President take after being presented with a non-Money Bill for assent?
Answer: The President may return the Bill to the Houses with a message requesting that they will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions.

Question: What happens if a Bill is returned to the Houses and is passed again?
Answer: If the Bill is returned and is passed again by the Houses with or without amendment and presented to the President for assent, the President shall not withhold assent therefrom.

Question: What is the President required to do if a Bill is returned, passed again by the Houses with or without amendment, and presented to him for assent?
Answer: The President shall not withhold assent from the Bill.

Question: What is the 'annual financial statement' referred to in this text?
Answer: The 'annual financial statement' is a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for each financial year, which the President causes to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.

Question: Which document, mentioned in this text, is a report of the estimated income and expenditure of the Government of India for each fiscal year, laid before both Houses of Parliament by the President?
Answer: The 'annual financial statement' is such a document.

Question: What are the two categories of expenditure in the annual financial statement?
Answer: The two categories of expenditure in the annual financial statement are the sums required to meet expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India, and the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: What are the sums required to meet expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India, and the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India referred to in the annual financial statement?
Answer: The sums required to meet expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India, and the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India are referred to as the two categories of expenditure in the annual financial statement.

Question: What is the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India includes the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office, the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, debt charges for which the Government of India is liable, and the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Supreme Court and the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Federal Court and any High Court.

Question: What does the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India include?
Answer: The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India includes the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office, the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, debt charges for which the Government of India is liable, and the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Supreme Court and the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Federal Court and any High Court.

Question: What is the salary, allowances and pension payable to?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

Question: Who receives the salary, allowances and pension from the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

Question: What are the sums required to satisfy?
Answer: Any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal

Question: What is needed to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal?
Answer: The sums are required.

Question: Can the estimates related to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India be submitted to the vote of Parliament?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible for the estimates related to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India to be submitted to the vote of Parliament?
Answer: No

Question: Who has the power to assent or refuse to assent to any demand?
Answer: The House of the People

Question: What entity is able to assent or refuse to assent to any demand?
Answer: The House of the People

Question: Can a demand for a grant be made without the recommendation of the President?
Answer: No

Question: Is it necessary to have the recommendation of the President to make a demand for a grant?
Answer: Yes

Question: What is introduced after the grants under article 113 have been made by the House of the People?
Answer: A Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of India

Question: What is introduced once the House of the People has made the grants under article 113?
Answer: A Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of India

Question: Can an amendment be proposed to any Bill in either House of Parliament which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made?
Answer: No

Question: Is it allowed to propose an amendment to any Bill in either House of Parliament that varies the amount or alters the destination of any grant?
Answer: No

Question: What is required for money to be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India according to the constitution?
Answer: No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of the constitution.

Question: What is the condition for withdrawing money from the Consolidated Fund of India as per the constitution?
Answer: No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of the constitution.

Question: Under what circumstances can the President call for supplementary, additional or excess grants according to article 115 of the Indian constitution?
Answer: The President can call for supplementary, additional or excess grants if the amount authorised by any law for a particular service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient, or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year, or if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year.

Question: What does the Indian Constitution's Article 115 say about the conditions under which the president can request for supplementary, additional, or excess grants?
Answer: According to Article 115 of the Indian Constitution, the President can request for supplementary, additional, or excess grants if the amount authorised for a particular service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient, or a need arises during the current financial year for additional expenditure on a new service not included in the annual financial statement for that year, or if any money has been spent on a service during a financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and that year.

Question: What provisions are in effect in relation to any statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand.

Question: Which articles have provisions in effect relating to any statement and expenditure or demand and any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand?
Answer: The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 have effect in this context.

Question: What power does the House of the People have in relation to the financial year?
Answer: The House of the People has the power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in relation to that expenditure.

Question: What is the procedure the House of the People must follow to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year?
Answer: The House of the People must complete the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114.

Question: When can the House of the People make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India?
Answer: The House of the People can make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement.

Question: Under what circumstances can the House of the People make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India?
Answer: The House of the People can make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement.

Question: Can the House of the People make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial year?
Answer: Yes, the House of the People can make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial year.

Question: Is it possible for the House of the People to make an exceptional grant that doesn't form part of the current service of any financial year?
Answer: Yes, it is possible.

Question: Who has the power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The Parliament has the power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: Who has the authority to sanction the withdrawal of money from the Consolidated Fund of India by law?
Answer: The Parliament has the authority to sanction the withdrawal of money from the Consolidated Fund of India by law.

Question: Under what conditions can a Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 be introduced or moved?
Answer: A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 can only be introduced or moved on the recommendation of the President and such a Bill cannot be introduced in the Council of States.

Question: Who needs to recommend a Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 in order for it to be introduced or moved? And where can such a Bill not be introduced?
Answer: A Bill or amendment making provision for these matters can only be introduced or moved on the recommendation of the President and it cannot be introduced in the Council of States.

Question: Is a recommendation required for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax?
Answer: No, a recommendation is not required for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

Question: Is a recommendation needed to move an amendment that makes provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax?
Answer: No

Question: When is a Bill or amendment not deemed to make provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110?
Answer: A Bill or amendment is not deemed to make provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties.

Question: What does a Bill or amendment provide for, if it is not deemed to make provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110?
Answer: If a Bill or amendment is not deemed to make provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110, it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties.

Question: What action should be taken before a Bill involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India can be passed by either House of Parliament?
Answer: The President has to recommend to that House the consideration of the Bill.

Question: Who has to recommend to the House the consideration of a Bill involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India before it can be passed by either House of Parliament?
Answer: The President

Question: Who can make rules for regulating the procedure and conduct of business in the House of Parliament?
Answer: Each House of Parliament.

Question: What entity is responsible for making rules for regulating the procedure and conduct of business in Parliament?
Answer: Each House of Parliament.

Question: What will take effect in relation to Parliament until rules are made under clause (1)?
Answer: The rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution.

Question: What rules will be in force before the commencement of the Constitution until new rules are made under clause (1) in relation to Parliament?
Answer: The rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution.

Question: Who can make modifications and adaptations in the rules of procedure and standing orders?
Answer: The Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People.

Question: What roles are responsible for making modifications and adaptations in the rules of procedure and standing orders?
Answer: The Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People.

Question: Who presides at a joint sitting of the two Houses?
Answer: The Speaker of the House of the People.

Question: What position does the person who presides over a joint sitting of the two Houses hold?
Answer: The Speaker of the House of the People.

Question: What can Parliament regulate by law in relation to financial business?
Answer: The procedure of, and the conduct of business in, each House of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: What does the law by Parliament in relation to financial business regulate?
Answer: The procedure of, and the conduct of business in, each House of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: What happens if a law is inconsistent with a rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (1) of article 118?
Answer: The provision of the law shall prevail.

Question: Which will prevail if a law is inconsistent with a rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (1) of article 118?
Answer: The provision of the law shall prevail.

Question: What languages can business in Parliament be transacted in according to article 120?
Answer: Business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English.

Question: According to Article 120, in what languages shall the business in Parliament be transacted?
Answer: Business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English.

Question: What can the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People permit?
Answer: They may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to address the House in his mother-tongue.

Question: Who can a member, who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or English, address the House in his mother-tongue with the permission of?
Answer: The Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People

Question: What happens after fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution according to article 120 clause 2?
Answer: This article shall have effect as if the words 'or in English' were omitted therefrom.

Question: What changes in the Constitution after fifteen years from its commencement according to article 120 clause 2?
Answer: The phrase 'or in English' is considered omitted from this article.

Question: What restriction is placed on discussions in Parliament according to article 121?
Answer: No discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.

Question: What happens if a discussion about the conduct of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties is initiated in Parliament?
Answer: According to article 121, no discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.

Question: What does article 122 state about the validity of proceedings in Parliament?
Answer: The validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

Question: On what grounds cannot the validity of any proceedings in Parliament be questioned according to article 122?
Answer: The validity of any proceedings in Parliament cannot be called into question on the grounds of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

Question: Can an officer or member of Parliament be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise of regulating procedure or the conduct of business?
Answer: No, they cannot be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.

Question: Can someone exercising powers of regulating procedure or conducting business in Parliament be subject to the jurisdiction of any court?
Answer: No, an officer or member of Parliament cannot be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.

Question: What power does the President have during the recess of Parliament according to article 123?
Answer: The President has the power to promulgate Ordinances during the recess of Parliament.

Question: During what time and under which article does the President have the power to promulgate Ordinances?
Answer: During the recess of Parliament, under article 123, the President has the power to promulgate Ordinances.

Question: What action can the President take if he deems it necessary?
Answer: The President can promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require.

Question: What can the President do if the circumstances appear to him to require?
Answer: The President can promulgate such Ordinances as he deems necessary.

Question: What impact does an Ordinance promulgated under this article have?
Answer: An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament.

Question: What is the force and effect of an Ordinance promulgated under a certain article?
Answer: It has the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament.

Question: What happens to an ordinance after it is laid before both Houses of Parliament?
Answer: The ordinance shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions.

Question: How long does an ordinance operate after being laid before both Houses of Parliament, and what could cause it to cease operation before this period?
Answer: The ordinance operates for six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, but if resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses before the expiration of this period, it ceases to operate upon the passing of the second of those resolutions.

Question: Can an ordinance be withdrawn?
Answer: Yes, an ordinance may be withdrawn at any time by the President.

Question: Who has the authority to withdraw an ordinance at any time?
Answer: The President has the authority to withdraw an ordinance at any time.

Question: What happens if an Ordinance makes a provision that Parliament would not be competent to enact?
Answer: If an Ordinance under this article makes any provision which Parliament would not under this Constitution be competent to enact, it shall be void.

Question: What would be the consequence if an Ordinance under the Constitution makes any provision which Parliament would not be competent to enact?
Answer: It shall be void.

Question: What is the Supreme Court of India comprised of?
Answer: The Supreme Court of India consists of a Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges.

Question: What is the maximum number of Judges, including the Chief Justice, that the Supreme Court of India can have according to law?
Answer: The Supreme Court of India can have a maximum of eight Judges including the Chief Justice, unless Parliament prescribes a larger number.

Question: How is a Judge of the Supreme Court appointed?
Answer: Every Judge of the Supreme Court is appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission.

Question: Who appoints every Judge of the Supreme Court and under whose recommendation?
Answer: The President appoints every Judge of the Supreme Court under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission.

Question: How long does a Judge of the Supreme Court hold office?
Answer: A Judge of the Supreme Court shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years.

Question: Until what age does a Judge of the Supreme Court hold office?
Answer: A Judge of the Supreme Court holds office until he attains the age of sixty-five years.

Question: How can a Judge of the Supreme Court resign his office?
Answer: A Judge may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the President.

Question: To whom should a Judge of the Supreme Court address his resignation letter?
Answer: A Judge should address his resignation letter to the President.

Question: How can a Judge of the Supreme Court be removed from his office?
Answer: A Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause (4).

Question: In which clause is the manner for removing a Judge of the Supreme Court from his office provided?
Answer: The manner for removing a Judge is provided in clause (4).

Question: How is the age of a Judge of the Supreme Court determined?
Answer: The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be determined by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.

Question: Who determines the age of a Judge of the Supreme Court and in what manner?
Answer: The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court is determined by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.

Question: What are the qualifications for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court in India?
Answer: A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of India and— (a) has been for at least five years a Judge of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or (b) has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or (c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist.

Question: Who is considered to be a qualified candidate for the position of a Supreme Court Judge in India?
Answer: A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of India and— (a) has been for at least five years a Judge of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or (b) has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or (c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist.

Question: What does 'High Court' mean in the context of this clause?
Answer: 'High Court' means a High Court which exercises, or which at any time before the commencement of this Constitution exercised, jurisdiction in any part of the territory of India.

Question: What does it mean when 'High Court' is referred to as a court which exercises, or which at any time before the commencement of this Constitution exercised, jurisdiction in any part of the territory of India?
Answer: In this context, 'High Court' refers to a High Court as described in a specific clause.

Question: How can a Judge of the Supreme Court be removed from his office?
Answer: A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the President passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting has been presented to the President in the same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.

Question: What is the procedure for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court, in case of proved misbehaviour or incapacity, as per the Constitution?
Answer: A Judge of the Supreme Court can be removed from his office by an order of the President. This order is passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting has been presented to the President in the same session.

Question: What is the procedure before a Judge of the Supreme Court enters upon his office?
Answer: Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

Question: Who does a person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court have to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before, and when does this happen?
Answer: Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him.

Question: Can a person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India?
Answer: No, a person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall not plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.

Question: Is it allowed for a person who has served as a Supreme Court Judge to plead or act in any court or before any authority in India?
Answer: No, it is not allowed for a person who has served as a Supreme Court Judge to plead or act in any court or before any authority in India.

Question: What is the National Judicial Appointments Commission?
Answer: The National Judicial Appointments Commission is a commission consisting of the Chief Justice of India, two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court, the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice, and two eminent persons nominated by a committee. The Commission is responsible for recommending persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts, recommending transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts, and ensuring that the person recommended is of ability and integrity.

Question: What are the responsibilities and composition of the National Judicial Appointments Commission in India?
Answer: The National Judicial Appointments Commission is responsible for recommending persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts, recommending transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts, and ensuring that the person recommended is of ability and integrity. It consists of the Chief Justice of India, two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court, the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice, and two eminent persons nominated by a committee.

Question: Who are the members of the National Judicial Appointments Commission?
Answer: The members of the National Judicial Appointments Commission are the Chief Justice of India, two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of India, the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice, and two eminent persons nominated by the committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People.

Question: Who nominates the two eminent persons to be members of the National Judicial Appointments Commission?
Answer: The two eminent persons are nominated by the committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People.

Question: What are the duties of the National Judicial Appointments Commission?
Answer: The duties of the National Judicial Appointments Commission include recommending persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts, recommending transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts from one High Court to any other High Court, and ensuring that the person recommended is of ability and integrity.

Question: Who does the National Judicial Appointments Commission recommend for positions such as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts, and who is responsible for their transfers?
Answer: The National Judicial Appointments Commission is responsible for recommending persons for these positions and their transfers. They also ensure that the person recommended is of ability and integrity.

Question: What is the tenure of an eminent person nominated to the National Judicial Appointments Commission?
Answer: An eminent person nominated to the National Judicial Appointments Commission is nominated for a period of three years and is not eligible for renomination.

Question: What is the period of nomination and eligibility for renomination for an eminent person nominated to the National Judicial Appointments Commission?
Answer: An eminent person nominated to the National Judicial Appointments Commission is nominated for a period of three years and is not eligible for renomination.

Question: What happens if there is a vacancy or defect in the constitution of the National Judicial Appointments Commission?
Answer: No act or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments Commission shall be questioned or be invalidated merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.

Question: Can the acts or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments Commission be questioned or invalidated due to any vacancy or defect in the commission's constitution?
Answer: No, no act or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments Commission shall be questioned or be invalidated merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.

Question: Who is empowered to regulate the procedure for the appointment of judges?
Answer: Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for the appointment of Chief Justice of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts and empower the Commission to lay down by regulations the procedure for the discharge of its functions, the manner of selection of persons for appointment.

Question: Who is responsible for setting the regulations for the discharge of functions, manner of selection of persons for appointment, and the procedure for the appointment of the Chief Justice of India, other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts?
Answer: Parliament may regulate these procedures by law and also empower the Commission to lay down these regulations.

Question: Who determines the salaries of the Judges of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The salaries of the Judges of the Supreme Court are determined by Parliament by law.

Question: Who are the salaries of the Supreme Court Judges determined by?
Answer: The salaries of the Supreme Court Judges are determined by Parliament.

Question: Who is entitled to determine the privileges, allowances, and rights of a Supreme Court Judge?
Answer: The privileges, allowances, and rights of a Supreme Court Judge are determined by or under law made by Parliament.

Question: Who or what determines the privileges, allowances, and rights of a Supreme Court Judge?
Answer: The privileges, allowances, and rights of a Supreme Court Judge are determined by or under law made by Parliament.

Question: What happens when the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant?
Answer: When the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant or the Chief Justice is unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint for the purpose.

Question: Who performs the duties of the office when the Chief Justice of India is unable to perform the duties or the office is vacant?
Answer: When the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant or the Chief Justice is unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint for the purpose.

Question: Who can be appointed as an ad hoc Judge?
Answer: If there is not a quorum of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of the Court, a Judge of a High Court who is duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court can be appointed as an ad hoc Judge.

Question: Under what circumstances can a Judge of a High Court who is duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court be appointed as an ad hoc Judge?
Answer: If there is not a quorum of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of the Court, a Judge of a High Court who is duly qualified can be appointed as an ad hoc Judge.

Question: What is the duty of a Judge who has been designated as an ad hoc Judge?
Answer: The duty of the Judge who has been designated as an ad hoc Judge is, in priority to other duties of his office, to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court.

Question: What does a Judge who has been designated as an ad hoc Judge prioritize over his other duties?
Answer: The Judge who has been designated as an ad hoc Judge prioritizes attending the sittings of the Supreme Court over his other duties.

Question: What powers does a judge have while attending the Supreme Court?
Answer: A judge attending the Supreme Court has all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges, and shall discharge the duties, of a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: Who has all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges, and discharges the duties, of the Supreme Court?
Answer: A judge attending the Supreme Court has all these powers and duties.

Question: Can a retired Judge attend sittings of the Supreme Court?
Answer: Yes, a retired Judge can attend sittings of the Supreme Court if the National Judicial Appointments Commission requests with the previous consent of the President.

Question: Who needs to request for a retired Judge to attend sittings of the Supreme Court, and whose consent is required?
Answer: The National Judicial Appointments Commission needs to request for a retired Judge to attend sittings of the Supreme Court, with the previous consent of the President.

Question: What are the retired Judges entitled to while sitting and acting in the Supreme Court?
Answer: The retired Judges are entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: Who determines the allowances for retired Judges while sitting and acting in the Supreme Court and what jurisdiction, powers and privileges do they have?
Answer: The President determines the allowances for retired Judges while sitting and acting in the Supreme Court and they have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: What is the condition for a retired Judge to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The retired Judge needs to consent to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: What is required for a retired Judge to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The retired Judge needs to consent to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: What is the status of the Supreme Court as per the record?
Answer: The Supreme Court is a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.

Question: What powers does the Supreme Court have as a court of record?
Answer: As a court of record, the Supreme Court shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.

Question: Where does the Supreme Court sit?
Answer: The Supreme Court sits in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.

Question: Who has the authority to appoint the place or places where the Supreme Court sits, with the approval of the President?
Answer: The Chief Justice of India has the authority to appoint the place or places where the Supreme Court sits, with the approval of the President.

Question: What is the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in any dispute between the Government of India and one or more States, between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other, or between two or more States, if and in so far as the dispute involves any question.

Question: In what types of disputes does the Supreme Court have original jurisdiction?
Answer: The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in any dispute between the Government of India and one or more States, between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other, or between two or more States, if and in so far as the dispute involves any question.

Question: What does the jurisdiction not extend to according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The jurisdiction does not extend to a dispute arising out of any treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which, having been entered into or executed before the commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation after such commencement.

Question: What type of dispute does the Constitution of India specify its jurisdiction does not extend to?
Answer: The Constitution of India specifies that its jurisdiction does not extend to a dispute arising out of any treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which, having been entered into or executed before the commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation after such commencement.

Question: Who has exclusive jurisdiction in regard to questions as to constitutional validity of Central laws according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Supreme Court has exclusive jurisdiction.

Question: Which court has exclusive jurisdiction in regard to questions as to constitutional validity of Central laws according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Supreme Court

Question: When can an appeal lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in the territory of India?
Answer: An appeal can lie to the Supreme Court if the High Court certifies under article 134A that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution.

Question: Under what conditions can a case from a High Court in the territory of India be appealed to the Supreme Court?
Answer: A case can be appealed to the Supreme Court if the High Court certifies under article 134A that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution.

Question: What does the expression 'final order' include according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The expression 'final order' includes an order deciding an issue which, if decided in favour of the appellant, would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case.

Question: What would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case if decided in favour of the appellant, according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: An order deciding an issue, termed as a 'final order', would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case if decided in favour of the appellant.

Question: When can an appeal lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India?
Answer: An appeal can lie to the Supreme Court if the High Court certifies under article 134A that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance and that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.

Question: Under what conditions can an appeal from a civil proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India lie to the Supreme Court?
Answer: An appeal can lie to the Supreme Court if the High Court certifies under article 134A that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance and that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.

Question: Can a party appeal to the Supreme Court under clause (1) on the grounds of a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution?
Answer: Yes, any party appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1) may urge as one of the grounds in such appeal that a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution has been wrongly decided.

Question: Can a party urge that a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution has been wrongly decided when appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1)?
Answer: Yes, any party appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1) can make such a claim.

Question: Can one appeal to the Supreme Court from the judgment, decree or final order of one Judge of a High Court?
Answer: No, unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, no appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from the judgment, decree or final order of one Judge of a High Court.

Question: Who has the authority to allow an appeal to the Supreme Court from the judgment, decree or final order of one Judge of a High Court?
Answer: The Parliament has the authority to allow such an appeal by law.

Question: When can an appeal lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court?
Answer: An appeal can lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court if the High Court has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death, or has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death, or certifies under article 134A that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.

Question: Under what circumstances can an appeal lie to the Supreme Court from a High Court's judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding?
Answer: An appeal can lie to the Supreme Court from a High Court's judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding if the High Court has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death, or has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death, or certifies under article 134A that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.

Question: Can Parliament confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals?
Answer: Yes, Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law.

Question: Can Parliament set conditions and limitations when conferring further powers on the Supreme Court to hear and entertain appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India?
Answer: Yes, Parliament can set such conditions and limitations as specified in the law.

Question: When can a High Court issue a Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court?
Answer: A High Court may issue a Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion, and shall do so, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party aggrieved.

Question: Under what circumstances may a High Court issue a Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court?
Answer: A High Court may issue a Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion, and shall do so, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party aggrieved.

Question: What does article 135 of the Constitution of India state?
Answer: Article 135 states that the jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law will be exercisable by the Supreme Court until Parliament provides otherwise. The Supreme Court will have jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter that the provisions of article 133 or article 134 do not apply to, if those powers were exercisable by the Federal Court before the commencement of the Constitution under any existing law.

Question: Which article of the Constitution of India states that the jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law will be exercisable by the Supreme Court until Parliament provides otherwise, and that the Supreme Court will have jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter that the provisions of article 133 or article 134 do not apply to, if those powers were exercisable by the Federal Court before the commencement of the Constitution under any existing law?
Answer: This is stated in Article 135 of the Constitution of India.

Question: What is the purpose of article 136 in the Constitution of India?
Answer: Article 136 allows the Supreme Court, in its discretion, to grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India. However, this doesn't apply to any judgment, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.

Question: Which article in the Constitution of India allows the Supreme Court to grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India, excluding those passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces?
Answer: Article 136 in the Constitution of India allows this.

Question: What is stated in Article 137 of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Article 137 of the Constitution of India states that, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or any rules made under article 145, the Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.

Question: Which article of the Constitution of India provides the Supreme Court the power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or any rules made under article 145?
Answer: Article 137 of the Constitution of India provides this power to the Supreme Court.

Question: What does article 138 of the Constitution of India mention?
Answer: Article 138 states that the Supreme Court will have further jurisdiction and powers with respect to any of the matters in the Union List as Parliament may by law confer. The Supreme Court will also have further jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter as the Government of India and the Government of any State may by law confer.

Question: Which article of the Constitution of India specifies that the Supreme Court will have further jurisdiction and powers with respect to any of the matters in the Union List as Parliament may by law confer, and also with respect to any matter as the Government of India and the Government of any State may by law confer?
Answer: This is specified in Article 138 of the Constitution of India.

Question: What powers may the Parliament confer on the Supreme Court according to article 139?
Answer: Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court power to issue directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for any purposes other than those mentioned in clause (2) of article 32.

Question: What powers can be conferred on the Supreme Court by law, specifically in relation to issuing directions, orders, or writs, as stated outside of clause (2) of article 32?
Answer: According to article 139, Parliament may confer on the Supreme Court the power to issue directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for any purposes other than those mentioned in clause (2) of article 32.

Question: What does article 139A of the constitution of India describe?
Answer: Article 139A describes the transfer of certain cases. If cases involving the same or substantially the same questions of law are pending before the Supreme Court and one or more High Courts or before two or more High Courts and the Supreme Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an application made by the Attorney-General of India or by a party to any such case that such questions are substantial questions of general importance, the Supreme Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself.

Question: What happens when cases involving the same or substantially the same questions of law are pending before the Supreme Court and one or more High Courts, or before two or more High Courts, and who has the authority to withdraw these cases?
Answer: According to Article 139A of the Indian Constitution, if such cases are pending and the Supreme Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an application made by the Attorney-General of India or by a party to any such case that such questions are substantial questions of general importance, the Supreme Court has the authority to withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself.

Question: What does article 140 of the constitution of India provide?
Answer: Article 140 provides that Parliament may by law make provision for conferring upon the Supreme Court such supplemental powers not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution as may appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by or under this Constitution.

Question: What does the Indian Constitution allow Parliament to do in regards to conferring supplemental powers on the Supreme Court via legislation, according to a constitutional article?
Answer: According to Article 140 of the Indian Constitution, Parliament may by law make provision for conferring upon the Supreme Court such supplemental powers not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution as may appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by or under this Constitution.

Question: Is the law declared by the Supreme Court binding on all courts within the territory of India?
Answer: Yes

Question: Does the Supreme Court's declared law apply to all courts within Indian territory?
Answer: Yes

Question: What powers does the Supreme Court have in doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it?
Answer: The Supreme Court may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary, and any decree or order made shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India.

Question: What can the Supreme Court do to enforce its decree or order throughout the territory of India in any cause or matter pending before it?
Answer: The Supreme Court may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice.

Question: Can the President consult the Supreme Court on a question of law or fact?
Answer: Yes, the President can refer the question to the Supreme Court for consideration.

Question: Who can refer a question to the Supreme Court for consideration?
Answer: The President can refer a question to the Supreme Court for consideration.

Question: What happens when the President refers a question to the Supreme Court?
Answer: The Supreme Court may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion on the question.

Question: What does the Supreme Court do when the President refers a question to them?
Answer: The Supreme Court may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion on the question.

Question: Are civil and judicial authorities in the territory of India required to act in aid of the Supreme Court?
Answer: Yes

Question: Is it mandatory for civil and judicial authorities in the territory of India to assist the Supreme Court?
Answer: Yes

Question: What act repealed the special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to constitutional validity of laws?
Answer: The Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977

Question: What did The Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977 do?
Answer: It repealed the special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to constitutional validity of laws.

Question: Who approves the rules made by the Supreme Court for regulating the practice and procedure of the Court?
Answer: The President

Question: Who approves the rules made by the Supreme Court for regulating the practice and procedure of the Court?
Answer: The President

Question: What does clause (1) of article 145 in the Constitution of India include?
Answer: It includes rules pertaining to persons practising before the Court, procedure for hearing appeals, proceedings for enforcement of rights, proceedings under article 139A, entertainment of appeals under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134, conditions for review of judgment or order, costs of proceedings, granting of bail, stay of proceedings, summary determination of appeals, and procedure for inquiries referred to in clause (1) of article 317.

Question: Which article and clause of the Constitution of India includes rules pertaining to persons practising before the Court, procedure for hearing appeals, proceedings for enforcement of rights, proceedings under article 139A, entertainment of appeals under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134, conditions for review of judgment or order, costs of proceedings, granting of bail, stay of proceedings, summary determination of appeals, and procedure for inquiries referred to in clause (1) of article 317?
Answer: Clause (1) of article 145 in the Constitution of India includes these rules.

Question: What can rules made under article 145 of the Constitution of India fix?
Answer: They can fix the minimum number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose, and provide for the powers of single Judges and Division Courts.

Question: What can be determined by the rules made under article 145 of the Constitution of India regarding the number of Judges and the powers of single Judges and Division Courts?
Answer: They can fix the minimum number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose, and provide for the powers of single Judges and Division Courts.

Question: Who decides a case involving a substantial question of law as per the Constitution of India?
Answer: The minimum number of Judges who are to sit for the purpose of deciding any case involving a substantial question of law.

Question: Who are required to sit for the purpose of deciding any case involving a substantial question of law as per the Constitution of India?
Answer: The minimum number of Judges

Question: How many judges are required for the interpretation of this Constitution or for hearing any reference under article 143?
Answer: Five

Question: What is the number of judges required for the interpretation of the Constitution or for hearing any reference under article 143?
Answer: Five

Question: What should the Court do if it is satisfied that the appeal involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution?
Answer: Such Court shall refer the question for opinion to a Court constituted as required by this clause for the purpose of deciding any case involving such a question and shall on receipt of the opinion dispose of the appeal in conformity with such opinion.

Question: What is the procedure for the Court to follow when a substantial question of constitutional law arises during an appeal, according to the clause?
Answer: The Court should refer the question for opinion to a Court constituted as required by this clause for the purpose of deciding any case involving such a question. Upon receiving the opinion, the Court should then dispose of the appeal in accordance with that opinion.

Question: Where should the judgment be delivered by the Supreme Court?
Answer: In open Court

Question: Where does the Supreme Court deliver its judgment?
Answer: In open Court

Question: Who is responsible for the appointments of officers and servants of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The Chief Justice of India or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he may direct

Question: Who can the Chief Justice of India direct to appoint officers and servants of the Supreme Court?
Answer: Other Judge or officer of the Court

Question: What is the condition for a person not already attached to the Court to be appointed to any office connected with the Court?
Answer: The President may require that in such cases, no person not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court, save after consultation with the Union Public Service Commission.

Question: Who has the authority to require that no person not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court, and who must they consult with?
Answer: The President has the authority to require that no person not already attached to the Court is appointed to any office connected with the Court, and they must consult with the Union Public Service Commission.

Question: Who determines the conditions of service of officers and servants of the Supreme Court?
Answer: Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service of officers and servants of the Supreme Court shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of India.

Question: Who makes the rules for the conditions of service of officers and servants of the Supreme Court, subject to any law made by Parliament?
Answer: The Chief Justice of India.

Question: Who is authorised to make rules for the Supreme Court of India?
Answer: The Chief Justice of India or some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice of India

Question: Who can the Chief Justice of India authorise to make rules for the Supreme Court of India?
Answer: Some other Judge or officer of the Court

Question: What do the rules made for the Supreme Court of India need approval for?
Answer: Salaries, allowances, leave or pensions

Question: What aspects of the Supreme Court of India do the rules need approval for?
Answer: Salaries, allowances, leave or pensions

Question: Who needs to approve the rules related to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions of the Supreme Court of India?
Answer: The President

Question: Who approves the rules related to salaries, allowances, leave, or pensions of the Supreme Court of India?
Answer: The President

Question: What are the administrative expenses of the Supreme Court charged upon?
Answer: The Consolidated Fund of India

Question: What is charged with the administrative expenses of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The Consolidated Fund of India

Question: What does the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India need to do before they enter upon their office?
Answer: Make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule

Question: Who does the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India make and subscribe an oath or affirmation to before entering office and according to which document?
Answer: They make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, according to the form set out in the Third Schedule

Question: Who appoints the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
Answer: The President

Question: Who appoints the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
Answer: The President

Question: Who determines the salary and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
Answer: Parliament by law

Question: Who determines the salary and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India by law?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Can the salary of a Comptroller and Auditor-General be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible to alter the salary of a Comptroller and Auditor-General to his disadvantage after his appointment?
Answer: No

Question: Is the Comptroller and Auditor-General eligible for further office under the Government of India or any State after he ceases to hold his office?
Answer: No

Question: Is it true that the Comptroller and Auditor-General is not eligible for further office under the Government of India or any State after he ceases to hold his office?
Answer: Yes

Question: Who prescribes the conditions of service for the Indian Audit and Accounts Department?
Answer: The conditions of service are prescribed by rules made by the President after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General.

Question: Who makes the rules for the conditions of service for the Indian Audit and Accounts Department, and who are they consulted with?
Answer: The President makes the rules for the conditions of service after consulting with the Comptroller and Auditor-General.

Question: What expenses are charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The administrative expenses of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of persons serving in that office, are charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: What is the purpose of the expenses charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The purpose of the expenses charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India is to cover the administrative expenses of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of persons serving in that office.

Question: Who performs duties and exercises powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General.

Question: What is the role of The Comptroller and Auditor-General in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States?
Answer: They perform duties and exercise powers.

Question: Who advises on the form of accounts of the Union and of the States?
Answer: The President, on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

Question: Who advises the President on the form of accounts of the Union and of the States?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

Question: Who submits the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of a State?
Answer: The reports are submitted to the Governor of the State.

Question: To whom are the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of a State submitted?
Answer: The reports are submitted to the Governor of the State.

Question: What does the Governor of a State do with the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
Answer: The Governor shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

Question: Who is responsible for presenting the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to the Legislature of the State?
Answer: The Governor of a State is responsible for this.

Question: Does the expression 'State' include the State of Jammu and Kashmir?
Answer: No, the expression 'State' does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Question: What does the expression 'State' exclude?
Answer: The expression 'State' excludes the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Question: Who is the executive power of the State vested in?
Answer: The executive power of the State shall be vested in the Governor.

Question: In whom is the executive power of the State vested?
Answer: The executive power of the State is vested in the Governor.

Question: Can the same person be appointed as Governor for two or more States?
Answer: Yes, the same person can be appointed as Governor for two or more States.

Question: Is it possible for a single individual to hold the position of Governor in multiple States simultaneously?
Answer: Yes, the same person can be appointed as Governor for two or more States.

Question: How is the Governor of a State appointed?
Answer: The Governor of a State is appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.

Question: Who appoints the Governor of a State and how is it done?
Answer: The President appoints the Governor of a State by warrant under his hand and seal.

Question: What is the term of office of a Governor?
Answer: A Governor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

Question: How long does a Governor hold office from the date he enters upon his office?
Answer: A Governor holds office for a term of five years.

Question: Can a Governor continue to hold office after the expiration of his term?
Answer: Yes, a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

Question: What happens to a Governor after the expiration of his term if his successor has not yet entered office?
Answer: A Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

Question: What are the qualifications for appointment as Governor?
Answer: A person must be a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five years.

Question: What is the citizenship and age requirement for a person to be appointed as Governor?
Answer: The person must be a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five years.

Question: Can the Governor be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State?
Answer: No, the Governor shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State.

Question: Is it prohibited for the Governor to be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State?
Answer: Yes, it is prohibited for the Governor to be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State.

Question: What happens if a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature is appointed Governor?
Answer: He shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as Governor.

Question: What is deemed to occur when a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature enters upon his office as Governor?
Answer: He shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House.

Question: Can the Governor hold any other office of profit?
Answer: No, the Governor shall not hold any other office of profit.

Question: Is it allowed for the Governor to hold any other office of profit?
Answer: No, the Governor shall not hold any other office of profit.

Question: What are the privileges of the Governor?
Answer: The Governor shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of his official residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law.

Question: Who is entitled without payment of rent to the use of his official residences and also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law?
Answer: The Governor

Question: How are the emoluments and allowances allocated if the same person is appointed as Governor of two or more States?
Answer: The emoluments and allowances payable to the Governor shall be allocated among the States in such proportion as the President may by order determine.

Question: Who determines the allocation of emoluments and allowances payable to the Governor appointed to two or more States?
Answer: The President determines the allocation of the emoluments and allowances payable to the Governor.

Question: Can the emoluments and allowances of the Governor be diminished during his term of office?
Answer: No, the emoluments and allowances of the Governor shall not be diminished during his term of office.

Question: Is it allowed to diminish the emoluments and allowances of the Governor while he is in office?
Answer: No

Question: What is the oath or affirmation by the Governor?
Answer: Every Governor and every person discharging the functions of the Governor shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of the High Court an oath or affirmation to faithfully execute the office of Governor and will to the best of their ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that they will devote themselves to the service.

Question: Who should the Governor and every person discharging the functions of the Governor make and subscribe an oath or affirmation in the presence of before entering upon his office, and what should this oath or affirmation entail?
Answer: Before entering upon his office, every Governor and every person discharging the functions of the Governor should make and subscribe an oath or affirmation in the presence of the Chief Justice of the High Court. This oath or affirmation should entail faithfully executing the office of Governor and to the best of their ability preserving, protecting and defending the Constitution and the law, and devoting themselves to the service.

Question: Who can make provisions for the discharge of the functions of the Governor of a State in any contingency not provided for?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to make provisions for the discharge of the functions of the Governor of a State in any contingency not provided for?
Answer: The President

Question: What powers does the Governor of a State have in terms of sentencing?
Answer: The Governor of a State has the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends.

Question: Who has the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends?
Answer: The Governor of a State has these powers.

Question: What is the extent of executive power of a State according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the executive power of a State extends to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws, but is subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly conferred by the Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the Union or authorities thereof.

Question: To what matters does the executive power of a State extend, and what are its limitations according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The executive power of a State extends to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws. However, it is subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly conferred by the Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the Union or authorities thereof.

Question: What is the role of the Council of Ministers in relation to the Governor?
Answer: The Council of Ministers, with the Chief Minister at the head, is there to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions, unless the Governor is required to exercise his functions in his discretion by the Constitution.

Question: Who aids and advises the Governor in the exercise of his functions, unless required to exercise his functions in his discretion by the Constitution?
Answer: The Council of Ministers, with the Chief Minister at the head, aids and advises the Governor in the exercise of his functions.

Question: Who has the final decision if a question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the Governor is required to act in his discretion?
Answer: The decision of the Governor in his discretion is final.

Question: Whose decision is final in his discretion?
Answer: The decision of the Governor in his discretion is final.

Question: Who appoints the Chief Minister?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who appoints the Chief Minister?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who appoints the other Ministers?
Answer: The Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister

Question: On whose advice does the Governor appoint the other Ministers?
Answer: The Chief Minister

Question: How long do the Ministers hold office?
Answer: The Ministers hold office during the pleasure of the Governor

Question: Who has the power to decide the duration of a Minister's term in office?
Answer: The Governor has the power to decide the duration of a Minister's term in office

Question: What is the maximum number of Ministers in a State?
Answer: The total number of Ministers in a State shall not exceed fifteen per cent of the total number of members of the Legislative Assembly of that State

Question: What is the percentage limit of the total number of members of the Legislative Assembly that determines the maximum number of Ministers in a State?
Answer: The maximum number of Ministers in a State shall not exceed fifteen per cent of the total number of members of the Legislative Assembly of that State

Question: What is the minimum number of Ministers in a State?
Answer: The number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister in a State shall not be less than twelve

Question: What is the minimum number of Ministers a State should have, including the Chief Minister?
Answer: A State should have not less than twelve Ministers, including the Chief Minister

Question: What happens if the total number of Ministers in any State exceeds the said fifteen per cent at the commencement of the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003?
Answer: The total number of Ministers in that State shall be brought in conformity with the provisions of this clause within six months from such date as the President may by public notification appoint

Question: What needs to be done if the number of Ministers in a State exceeds the limit set by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, and when should this action be taken?
Answer: The total number of Ministers in that State shall be brought in conformity with the provisions of this clause within six months from such date as the President may by public notification appoint

Question: Under what condition is a member of the Legislative Assembly of a State disqualified to be appointed as a Minister?
Answer: A member who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister

Question: Who is disqualified to be appointed as a Minister in the Legislative Assembly of a State?
Answer: A member who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule

Question: Who is responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State?
Answer: The Council of Ministers

Question: Who is the Council of Ministers responsible to in the State?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly of the State

Question: What happens if a Minister is not a member of the Legislature of the State for six consecutive months?
Answer: The Minister shall cease to be a Minister

Question: What happens when a Minister ceases to be a Minister?
Answer: This can happen if the Minister is not a member of the Legislature of the State for six consecutive months.

Question: Who determines the salaries and allowances of Ministers?
Answer: The Legislature of the State

Question: Who is responsible for setting the salaries and allowances of Ministers?
Answer: The Legislature of the State

Question: Who appoints the Advocate-General for the State?
Answer: The Governor of each State

Question: Who does the Governor of each State appoint?
Answer: The Advocate-General for the State

Question: What is the duty of the Advocate-General?
Answer: To give advice to the Government of the State upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character

Question: Who is responsible for giving advice to the Government of the State upon legal matters and performing other duties of a legal character?
Answer: The Advocate-General

Question: How long does the Advocate-General hold office?
Answer: The Advocate-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor

Question: Who has the authority to determine the tenure of the Advocate-General's office?
Answer: The Governor has the authority to determine the tenure of the Advocate-General's office

Question: Who determines the remuneration of the Advocate-General?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who is responsible for determining the remuneration of the Advocate-General?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who expresses the executive action of the Government of a State?
Answer: All executive action of the Government of a State shall be expressed

Question: Who shall express all executive action of the Government of a State?
Answer: The executive action of the Government of a State is expressed by the state government.

Question: Who authenticates orders and other instruments made in the name of the Governor?
Answer: The orders and other instruments made in the name of the Governor are authenticated in the manner specified in rules made by the Governor.

Question: In what manner are the orders and other instruments made in the name of the Governor authenticated?
Answer: The orders and other instruments made in the name of the Governor are authenticated in the manner specified in rules made by the Governor.

Question: What is the role of the Governor in the transaction of the business of the Government of the State?
Answer: The Governor makes rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of the State, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.

Question: Who is responsible for making rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of the State, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business?
Answer: The Governor is responsible for making these rules.

Question: What are the duties of the Chief Minister of each State according to section 167?
Answer: (a) to communicate to the Governor of the State all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation; (b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor may call for; and (c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.

Question: What is communicated to the Governor of the State by the Chief Minister according to section 167? What information does the Chief Minister furnish to the Governor? And when does the Chief Minister submit a matter for the consideration of the Council of Ministers?
Answer: The Chief Minister communicates all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation to the Governor. The Chief Minister furnishes such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor may call for. If the Governor requires, the Chief Minister submits for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.

Question: What does the Legislature in every State consist of according to section 168?
Answer: For every State there shall be a Legislature which shall consist of the Governor, and in some states two Houses, in others one House.

Question: Who does the Legislature consist of in every State as per section 168?
Answer: The Legislature in every State consists of the Governor, and in some states two Houses, in others one House.

Question: What are the Houses of the Legislature of a State known as?
Answer: Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State, one shall be known as the Legislative Council and the other as the Legislative Assembly, and where there is only one House, it shall be known as the Legislative Assembly.

Question: What is the name for a single House of the Legislature of a State, and what are the names for two Houses of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: Where there is only one House of the Legislature of a State, it is known as the Legislative Assembly. When there are two Houses, one is known as the Legislative Council and the other as the Legislative Assembly.

Question: Who has the power to abolish or create a Legislative Council in a State?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What entity has the ability to create or abolish a Legislative Council in a State?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What conditions must be met for the Parliament to abolish or create a Legislative Council in a State?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly of the State must pass a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Assembly present and voting.

Question: What process must the Legislative Assembly of a State go through to abolish or create a Legislative Council?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly of the State must pass a resolution to abolish or create a Legislative Council by a majority of the total membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Assembly present and voting.

Question: What should any law referred to in clause (1) contain?
Answer: Such provisions for the amendment of the Constitution as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions as Parliament may deem necessary.

Question: What may be contained in a law referred to in clause (1) that is necessary for the amendment of the Constitution?
Answer: Such provisions for the amendment of the Constitution as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions as Parliament may deem necessary.

Question: Is such a law deemed to be an amendment of the Constitution for the purposes of article 368?
Answer: No

Question: Is the law not considered an amendment of the Constitution according to article 368?
Answer: Yes

Question: What is the composition of the Legislative Assemblies?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly of each State shall consist of not more than five hundred, and not less than sixty, members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the State.

Question: How are the members of the Legislative Assembly of each State chosen and what is the range for the total number of members?
Answer: The members of the Legislative Assembly of each State are chosen by direct election from territorial constituities in the State and the total number of members should not be more than five hundred and not less than sixty.

Question: How is each State divided for the purposes of clause (1)?
Answer: Each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such a manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.

Question: What does it mean when a State is divided into territorial constituencies in such a manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is the same throughout the State?
Answer: This means that each State is divided for the purposes of clause (1).

Question: How is 'population' defined in this context?
Answer: The 'population' means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Question: What does the term 'population' refer to when it is ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published?
Answer: In this context, the term 'population' is defined as the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Question: How is the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial constituencies adjusted?
Answer: Upon the completion of each census, it's adjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.

Question: When and by who is the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial constituencies adjusted?
Answer: Upon the completion of each census, it's adjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.

Question: When does the readjustment of the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly take effect?
Answer: The readjustment takes effect from such date as the President may, by order, specify.

Question: Who specifies the date when the readjustment of the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly takes effect, and how is it done?
Answer: The President specifies the date when the readjustment takes effect, by order.

Question: When is it not necessary to readjust the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State?
Answer: Until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published, it is not necessary to readjust.

Question: What event triggers the need to readjust the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State?
Answer: The need to readjust the total number of seats is triggered by the publication of the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026.

Question: What is the maximum number of members in the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: The total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State shall not exceed one third of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that State.

Question: What is the limit on the number of members in the Legislative Council of a State in relation to the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that State?
Answer: The total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State shall not exceed one third of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that State.

Question: What is the minimum number of members in the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: The total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State shall in no case be less than forty.

Question: What is the lower limit on the total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: The minimum number of members in the Legislative Council of a State is forty.

Question: Who shall elect the third part of the members according to the text?
Answer: The third part of the members shall be elected by electorates consisting of members of municipalities, district boards and such other local authorities in the State as Parliament may by law specify.

Question: Who will be elected by the electorates consisting of members of municipalities, district boards and other local authorities in the State as specified by law?
Answer: The third part of the members

Question: Who elects one-twelfth of the members according to the text?
Answer: One-twelfth of the members shall be elected by electorates consisting of persons residing in the State who have been for at least three years graduates of any university in the territory of India or have been for at least three years in possession of qualifications prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate of any such university.

Question: Who are the electorates that elect one-twelfth of the members?
Answer: The electorates that elect one-twelfth of the members are persons residing in the State who have been for at least three years graduates of any university in the territory of India or have been for at least three years in possession of qualifications prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate of any such university.

Question: Who is eligible to elect another one-twelfth of the members?
Answer: Another one-twelfth of the members shall be elected by electorates consisting of persons who have been for at least three years engaged in teaching in such educational institutions within the State, not lower in standard than that of a secondary school, as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament.

Question: Who shall be elected by electorates consisting of persons who have been for at least three years engaged in teaching in such educational institutions within the State, not lower in standard than that of a secondary school, as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament?
Answer: Another one-twelfth of the members

Question: Who elects one-third of the members according to the text?
Answer: One-third of the members shall be elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State from amongst persons who are not members of the Assembly.

Question: Who are the one-third members of the state elected by and who are they chosen from?
Answer: One-third of the members are elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State from amongst persons who are not members of the Assembly.

Question: Who nominates the remainder of the members?
Answer: The remainder of the members shall be nominated by the Governor in accordance with the provisions of clause (5).

Question: Who is responsible for nominating the remaining members as per clause (5)?
Answer: The Governor is responsible for nominating the remaining members as per clause (5).

Question: What qualifications should the members nominated by the Governor have?
Answer: The members to be nominated by the Governor shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as the following: Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service.

Question: Who shall the Governor nominate as members?
Answer: The Governor shall nominate members who have special knowledge or practical experience in literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service.

Question: What is the duration of every Legislative Assembly of every State?
Answer: Every Legislative Assembly of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years.

Question: How long does a Legislative Assembly of a State continue, unless it is sooner dissolved?
Answer: Every Legislative Assembly of every State continues for five years, unless sooner dissolved.

Question: What happens at the expiration of the five year period of the Assembly?
Answer: The expiration of the five year period shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly.

Question: What does the expiration of the five year period result in for the Assembly?
Answer: The expiration of the five year period shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly.

Question: Under what conditions can the five year period of the Assembly be extended?
Answer: The said period may be extended while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation. This extension is done by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

Question: How long can the Assembly's five year period be extended during a Proclamation of Emergency, and who has the authority to do so?
Answer: During a Proclamation of Emergency, the Assembly's five year period can be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

Question: Is the Legislative Council of a State subject to dissolution?
Answer: No, the Legislative Council of a State shall not be subject to dissolution.

Question: Can the Legislative Council of a State be dissolved?
Answer: No, it cannot be dissolved.

Question: What happens to one-third of the members of the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: As nearly as possible one-third of the members of the Legislative Council of a State shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of every second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.

Question: When do approximately one-third of the members of the Legislative Council of a State retire?
Answer: As nearly as possible one-third of the members of the Legislative Council of a State shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of every second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.

Question: What are the qualifications for membership of the State Legislature?
Answer: A person shall be a citizen of India, make and subscribe before some person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule, be at least twenty-five years of age for a seat in the Legislative Assembly and at least thirty years of age for a seat in the Legislative Council, and possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.

Question: What are the requirements for an Indian citizen to be eligible for a seat in the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council?
Answer: The individual needs to make and subscribe before some person authorised by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule. The age requirement is at least twenty-five years for a seat in the Legislative Assembly and at least thirty years for a seat in the Legislative Council. Additionally, they must possess other qualifications as prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament.

Question: What is the role of the Governor in relation to the State Legislature?
Answer: The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit. He may also prorogue the House or either House and dissolve the Legislative Assembly.

Question: Who is responsible for summoning the House or each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at a specific time and place, and has the power to prorogue the House or either House and dissolve the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What is the maximum time that can elapse between two sessions of the State Legislature?
Answer: Six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.

Question: What does it mean when it is stated that 'Six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session' in the context of the State Legislature?
Answer: It means that the maximum time that can elapse between two sessions of the State Legislature is six months.

Question: Who can address the Legislative Assembly or the House of the Legislature of a state?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who has the authority to address the Legislative Assembly or the House of the Legislature of a state?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What can the Governor require for the purpose of addressing the Legislative Assembly or the House of the Legislature?
Answer: The attendance of members

Question: Who can the Governor require for the purpose of addressing the Legislative Assembly or the House of the Legislature?
Answer: The attendance of members

Question: Can the Governor send messages to the House or Houses of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: Yes

Question: Is it possible for the Governor to communicate with the House or Houses of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: Yes

Question: When does the Governor give a special address to the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the first session of each year

Question: When does the Governor give his address at the commencement of the first session of each year and after each general election to the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: The Governor gives a special address to the Legislative Assembly at these times.

Question: What rights do Ministers and the Advocate-General have as respects the Houses?
Answer: Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a State shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly of the State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, both Houses, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislature of which he may be named a member, but shall not, by virtue of this article, be entitled to vote.

Question: Can Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a State speak in, take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly of the State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, both Houses, and speak in, and take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislature of which he may be named a member?
Answer: Yes, they have the right to do so, but they are not entitled to vote.

Question: What happens when the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant?
Answer: The Assembly shall choose two members to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker

Question: Who does the Assembly choose when the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant?
Answer: The Assembly shall choose two members to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker

Question: What happens when a member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker ceases to be a member of the Assembly?
Answer: He vacates his office.

Question: What occurs if a Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Assembly ceases to be a member?
Answer: He vacates his office.

Question: How can a Speaker or Deputy Speaker resign from his office?
Answer: By writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker.

Question: To whom should a Speaker or Deputy Speaker address their resignation letter?
Answer: If the member is the Speaker, the resignation letter should be addressed to the Deputy Speaker. If the member is the Deputy Speaker, the letter should be addressed to the Speaker.

Question: How can a Speaker or Deputy Speaker be removed from his office?
Answer: By a resolution of the Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly, with at least fourteen days' notice given of the intention to move the resolution.

Question: What is the process and requirements to remove a Speaker or Deputy Speaker from his office?
Answer: By a resolution of the Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly, with at least fourteen days' notice given of the intention to move the resolution.

Question: What happens to the office of the Speaker when the Assembly is dissolved?
Answer: The Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution.

Question: When does the Speaker vacate his office in case of the assembly's dissolution?
Answer: The Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution.

Question: Who performs the duties of the Speaker when the office is vacant?
Answer: The duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.

Question: Who takes over if both the Speaker and Deputy Speaker offices are vacant in the Assembly?
Answer: Such member of the Assembly as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.

Question: Who acts as Speaker during the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly?
Answer: The Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

Question: Who will take the role of Speaker if the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are both absent from a sitting of the Assembly?
Answer: Such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

Question: Can a Speaker or the Deputy Speaker preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration?
Answer: No, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker cannot preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.

Question: Who cannot preside over a resolution for their removal from office?
Answer: The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker cannot preside over such a resolution.

Question: Who presides when the removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration?
Answer: The Deputy Speaker does not preside when the removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration.

Question: Who does not preside when the removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration?
Answer: The Deputy Speaker does not preside when the removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration.

Question: What rights does the Speaker have when a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration in the Assembly?
Answer: The Speaker has the right to speak in, and otherwise take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly. He is entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

Question: When can the Speaker vote during proceedings of his removal from office in the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: The Speaker is entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

Question: Who chooses the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council?
Answer: The Legislative Council of every State having such Council chooses two members of the Council to be respectively Chairman and Deputy Chairman.

Question: Who are the two members chosen by the Legislative Council of every State having such Council?
Answer: The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council

Question: When does a member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council vacate his office?
Answer: A member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council vacates his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council.

Question: What happens if a member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council ceases to be a member of the Council?
Answer: If a member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council ceases to be a member of the Council, he vacates his office.

Question: How can a member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council resign his office?
Answer: A member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council may at any time resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Deputy Chairman or Chairman respectively.

Question: What is the procedure for a member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council to resign?
Answer: A member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council may at any time resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Deputy Chairman or Chairman respectively.

Question: How can a member be removed from his office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council?
Answer: A member can be removed from his office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council by a resolution of the Council passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council, provided that at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution.

Question: What is the procedure for removing a Chairman or Deputy Chairman from their position in a Legislative Council?
Answer: A member can be removed from his office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council by a resolution of the Council passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council, provided that at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution.

Question: Who performs the duties of the Chairman when the office is vacant?
Answer: The duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Chairman or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by such member of the Council as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.

Question: Who performs the duties of the Chairman if both the Chairman and Deputy Chairman's positions are vacant?
Answer: Such member of the Council as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.

Question: Who acts as Chairman during the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council?
Answer: The Deputy Chairman or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.

Question: Who will act as Chairman if both the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman are absent from a Council sitting, and there is no person determined by the rules of procedure present?
Answer: Such other person as may be determined by the Council will act as Chairman.

Question: Can the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration?
Answer: No, the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman shall not preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.

Question: Is the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman allowed to preside during the consideration of a resolution for his removal from office?
Answer: No, the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman is not allowed to preside during the consideration of a resolution for his removal from office.

Question: Does the Chairman have the right to speak in the proceedings of the Legislative Council while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration?
Answer: Yes, the Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Council while any resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.

Question: While a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration, can the Chairman still take part in the proceedings of the Legislative Council?
Answer: Yes, the Chairman can still take part in the proceedings of the Legislative Council while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.

Question: What are the allowances for the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council?
Answer: There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council, such salaries and allowances as may be determined.

Question: Who are the individuals that receive salaries and allowances as determined by the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council?
Answer: The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council receive such salaries and allowances.

Question: Who fixes the salaries and allowances of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: The Legislature of the State fixes the salaries and allowances by law.

Question: Who fixes the salaries and allowances by law in a State?
Answer: The Legislature of the State fixes the salaries and allowances by law.

Question: Does each House of the Legislature of a State have a separate secretarial staff?
Answer: Yes, each House of the Legislature of a State has a separate secretarial staff.

Question: Who has a separate secretarial staff in the Legislature of a State?
Answer: Each House of the Legislature of a State has a separate secretarial staff.

Question: Who can regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of the secretarial staff of the House or Houses of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: The Legislature of a State can regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of the secretarial staff.

Question: Who can regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of the secretarial staff?
Answer: The Legislature of a State

Question: What does every member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State have to do before taking his seat?
Answer: Every member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State has to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the Governor, or some person appointed by him.

Question: Who does every member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State make and subscribe an oath or affirmation to before taking his seat?
Answer: Every member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State has to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the Governor, or some person appointed by him.

Question: How are all questions at any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State determined?
Answer: All questions at any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State are determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such.

Question: Who determines all questions at any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: All questions are determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such.

Question: Can the Speaker or Chairman vote in the first instance?
Answer: No, the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the first instance.

Question: Is the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, allowed to vote in the first instance?
Answer: No

Question: What power does a House of the Legislature of a State have according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: A House of the Legislature of a State has the power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall be valid even if it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

Question: What happens if a person who is not entitled to do so, participates in the proceedings of the Legislature of a State in India?
Answer: Even if it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings, any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall be valid according to the Constitution of India.

Question: What constitutes a quorum for a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State in India?
Answer: Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the House, whichever is greater.

Question: What is the minimum number of members required for a quorum in a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State in India, unless the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides?
Answer: The quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State is ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the House, whichever is greater.

Question: What is the duty of the Speaker or Chairman when there is no quorum during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it is the duty of the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Question: What should the Speaker or Chairman do if there is no quorum during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, should either adjourn the House or suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Question: What is the provision for a person who is a member of both Houses of the Legislature of a State according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: No person shall be a member of both Houses of the Legislature of a State and provision shall be made by the Legislature of the State by law for the vacation by a person who is chosen a member of both Houses of his seat in one house or the other.

Question: What happens according to the law if a person is chosen as a member of both Houses of the Legislature of a State in India?
Answer: No person shall be a member of both Houses of the Legislature of a State and provision shall be made by the Legislature of the State by law for the vacation by a person who is chosen a member of both Houses of his seat in one house or the other.

Question: What happens if a person is a member of the Legislatures of two or more States specified in the First Schedule?
Answer: If a person is chosen a member of the Legislatures of two or more such States, then, at the expiration of such period as may be specified in rules made by the President, that person's seat in the Legislatures of all such States shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Legislatures of all but one of the States.

Question: What happens to the seats of a person who is chosen a member of the Legislatures of two or more States specified in the First Schedule and doesn't resign from all but one state within a specified period?
Answer: At the expiration of such period as may be specified in rules made by the President, that person's seat in the Legislatures of all such States shall become vacant.

Question: When does a member of a House of the Legislature of a State become disqualified?
Answer: A member of a House of the Legislature of a State becomes disqualified if he/she becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191, or he/she resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the speaker or the Chairman.

Question: What happens if a member of a House of the Legislature of a State becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191, or he/she resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the speaker or the Chairman?
Answer: A member of a House of the Legislature of a State becomes disqualified.

Question: What happens when a resignation is accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman?
Answer: The seat of the person resigning shall thereupon become vacant.

Question: What occurs when the seat of the person resigning becomes vacant?
Answer: It means that the resignation has been accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman.

Question: What happens if the Speaker or Chairman believes a resignation is not voluntary or genuine?
Answer: They shall not accept the resignation.

Question: What action does the Speaker or Chairman take if they believe a resignation is not voluntary or genuine?
Answer: They shall not accept the resignation.

Question: What actions can be taken if a member of a House of the Legislature is absent without permission for sixty days?
Answer: The House may declare his seat vacant.

Question: What can the House do if a member has been absent without permission for sixty days?
Answer: The House may declare his seat vacant.

Question: What are some disqualifications for membership to the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: Holding an office of profit under the Government of India or any State, being of unsound mind as declared by a competent court, being an undischarged insolvent, not being a citizen of India, voluntarily acquiring the citizenship of a foreign State, or being disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.

Question: What do holding an office of profit under the Government of India or any State, being of unsound mind as declared by a competent court, being an undischarged insolvent, not being a citizen of India, voluntarily acquiring the citizenship of a foreign State, or being disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament indicate?
Answer: These are some disqualifications for membership to the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State.

Question: What does not count as holding an office of profit under the Government of India or any State for the purposes of disqualification?
Answer: Being a Minister either for the Union or for such State does not count as holding an office of profit.

Question: Who is not considered as holding an office of profit under the Government of India or any State?
Answer: A Minister either for the Union or for such State is not considered as holding an office of profit.

Question: Who makes the final decision if a question arises about a member of a House of the Legislature of a State becoming subject to disqualifications?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who is responsible for making the final decision in case of a disqualification dispute involving a member of a State's House of the Legislature?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What does the Governor need to obtain before making any decision on such disqualification questions?
Answer: The opinion of the Election Commission

Question: Whose opinion does the Governor need to obtain before making any decision on disqualification questions?
Answer: The Election Commission

Question: What is the penalty for a person sitting or voting as a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State before complying with the requirements of article 188, or when not qualified or disqualified?
Answer: A penalty of five hundred rupees for each day on which he so sits or votes

Question: What is the daily penalty for a person who sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State before satisfying article 188's requirements or when not qualified or disqualified?
Answer: Five hundred rupees

Question: What freedoms are granted to the members of the Legislature of every State?
Answer: There shall be freedom of speech in the Legislature of every State

Question: Where is the freedom of speech granted according to the constitution?
Answer: The freedom of speech is granted in the Legislature of every State.

Question: What are members of the Legislature of a State immune to in respect of anything said or any vote given by them in the Legislature or any committee thereof?
Answer: They are not liable to any proceedings in any court

Question: What happens to the members of the Legislature of a State in respect to any proceedings in any court for anything said or any vote given by them in the Legislature or any committee thereof?
Answer: They are not liable

Question: What are the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: The powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the Legislature of a State, and of its members and committees, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by the Legislature by law. Until so defined, they shall be those of that House and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into force of section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.

Question: When do the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the Legislature of a State, and of its members and committees come into force?
Answer: The powers, privileges and immunities come into force immediately before the coming into force of section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, until they are defined by the Legislature by law.

Question: What rights do people have according to the Constitution in relation to the House of the Legislature of a State?
Answer: Persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of the Legislature of a State or any committee thereof.

Question: Who has the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of the Legislature of a State or any committee thereof according to the Constitution?
Answer: Persons who by virtue of this Constitution have these rights.

Question: What are the entitlements of members of the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: Members of the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council of a State shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined, by the Legislature of the State by law.

Question: Who are the ones entitled to receive salaries and allowances as determined by the Legislature of the State by law?
Answer: Members of the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council of a State are entitled to receive such salaries and allowances.

Question: Where can a Bill originate in the State Legislature?
Answer: A Bill may originate in either House of the Legislature of a State which has a Legislative Council.

Question: In which house of a state's legislature, that has a Legislative Council, can a bill originate?
Answer: A Bill may originate in either House of the Legislature of a State.

Question: What happens to a Bill in a State Legislature with a Legislative Council?
Answer: A Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a Legislative Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses.

Question: What is required for a Bill to be passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a Legislative Council?
Answer: A Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a Legislative Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses.

Question: What happens to a Bill pending in the Legislature of a State in case of prorogation?
Answer: A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation.

Question: Does a Bill pending in the Legislature of a State lapse by reason of the prorogation?
Answer: No, a Bill pending in the Legislature of a State does not lapse by reason of the prorogation.

Question: What happens to a Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a State which has not been passed by the Legislative Assembly on a dissolution of the Assembly?
Answer: The Bill shall not lapse.

Question: Does a Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a State lapse if it has not been passed by the Legislative Assembly upon a dissolution of the Assembly?
Answer: No, the Bill shall not lapse.

Question: What happens to a Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly of a State, or which having been passed by the Legislative Assembly is pending in the Legislative Council, on a dissolution of the Assembly?
Answer: The Bill shall lapse.

Question: What is the status of a Bill that was pending in the Legislative Assembly of a State or having been passed by the Legislative Assembly is pending in the Legislative Council, after the Assembly has been dissolved?
Answer: The Bill shall lapse.

Question: What can the Legislative Assembly do if a Bill is rejected by the Legislative Council or if the Council does not pass the Bill within three months?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly may pass the Bill again in the same or in any subsequent session with or without such amendments, if any, as have been made, suggested or agreed to by the Legislative Council and then transmit the Bill as so passed to the Legislative Council.

Question: What happens if the Legislative Assembly passes a Bill again in the same or in any subsequent session with or without such amendments, if any, as have been made, suggested or agreed to by the Legislative Council and then transmit the Bill as so passed to the Legislative Council?
Answer: The Bill is considered to be rejected by the Legislative Council or the Council has not passed the Bill within three months.

Question: What happens if a Bill passed for the second time by the Legislative Assembly is rejected by the Council or if the Council does not pass the Bill within one month?
Answer: The Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of the State in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the second time with such amendments, if any, as have been made or suggested by the Legislative Council and agreed to by the Legislative Assembly.

Question: What is deemed to occur if a Bill, having been passed for the second time by the Legislative Assembly, is either rejected by the Council or not passed by the Council within one month?
Answer: The Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of the State in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the second time with such amendments, if any, as have been made or suggested by the Legislative Council and agreed to by the Legislative Assembly.

Question: Where can a Money Bill not be introduced?
Answer: A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council.

Question: In which legislative body shall a Money Bill not be introduced?
Answer: Legislative Council

Question: What happens after a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations.

Question: What happens to a Money Bill after it has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State that has a Legislative Council?
Answer: After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly, it is transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations.

Question: What is the time period within which the Legislative Council should return the Money Bill with recommendations?
Answer: The Legislative Council shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recommendations.

Question: What should the Legislative Council do within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Money Bill?
Answer: The Legislative Council shall return the Money Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recommendations.

Question: What happens if the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council?
Answer: If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council.

Question: What is deemed to have happened if the Legislative Assembly passes a Money Bill without accepting any of the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council?
Answer: If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.

Question: What happens if a Money Bill is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within fourteen days?
Answer: If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.

Question: What is the consequence of a Money Bill, passed by the Legislative Assembly and sent to the Legislative Council for recommendations, not being returned within fourteen days?
Answer: If a Money Bill is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within fourteen days, it is deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.

Question: What is deemed to be a Money Bill?
Answer: A Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely: the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the State, or the amendment.

Question: What provisions must a bill contain to be considered a Money Bill, including its relationship with taxation and state borrowing?
Answer: A Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely: the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the State, or the amendment.

Question: What is a Money Bill not deemed to be because of?
Answer: A Bill is not deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licenses or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

Question: What provisions do not make a Bill a Money Bill?
Answer: A Bill providing for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licenses or fees for services rendered, or providing for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes, does not make it a Money Bill.

Question: Who has the final decision on whether a Bill introduced in the Legislature of a State is a Money Bill or not?
Answer: The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of such State has the final decision.

Question: Who has the final decision on whether a Bill introduced in the Legislative Assembly of a State is a Money Bill or not?
Answer: The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of such State has the final decision.

Question: What is endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted to the Legislative Council?
Answer: The certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill is endorsed.

Question: What is the certificate endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted to the Legislative Council?
Answer: It is the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

Question: What happens when a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State?
Answer: When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill.

Question: What does the Governor do after a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State, or in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State?
Answer: After a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State, it is presented to the Governor. The Governor then declares either that he assents to the Bill, that he withholds assent therefrom, or that he reserves the Bill.

Question: What can a Governor do if a Bill is presented to him for assent?
Answer: The Governor may return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message.

Question: What action can the Governor take when presented with a Bill that is not a Money Bill?
Answer: The Governor may return the Bill together with a message requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message.

Question: What happens when a Bill is returned to the House or Houses by the Governor?
Answer: When a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom.

Question: What will the House or Houses do if a Bill is returned by the Governor, and what happens if the Bill is passed again and presented to the Governor for assent?
Answer: When a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom.

Question: What is the Governor not allowed to assent to?
Answer: The Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.

Question: What should the Governor do if he believes that a Bill would derogate from the powers of the High Court and endanger its position as designed by the Constitution?
Answer: The Governor shall not assent to such a Bill, but shall reserve it for the consideration of the President.

Question: What happens when a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the President?
Answer: When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom.

Question: What will the President do when a Bill is reserved by a Governor for his consideration?
Answer: The President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom.

Question: What can the President do if the Bill is not a Money Bill?
Answer: The President may direct the Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the Legislature of the State together with such a message as is mentioned in the first proviso to article 200.

Question: What action may the President take with the Governor and the Houses of the Legislature of the State when a Bill is not a Money Bill, according to the first proviso to article 200?
Answer: The President may direct the Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the Legislature of the State together with such a message as is mentioned in the first proviso to article 200.

Question: What happens if the Bill is returned by the Governor to the House or Houses?
Answer: The House or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the House or Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration.

Question: What is the procedure if a Bill is reconsidered and again passed by the House or Houses after being returned by the Governor?
Answer: If a Bill is again passed by the House or Houses with or without amendment after being returned by the Governor, it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message.

Question: What is the Governor's role in financial matters?
Answer: In respect of every financial year, the Governor shall cause to be laid before the House or Houses a financial statement.

Question: Who is responsible for laying a financial statement before the House or Houses every financial year?
Answer: The Governor is responsible for laying a financial statement before the House or Houses every financial year.

Question: What is the 'annual financial statement' as referred to in this text?
Answer: The 'annual financial statement' is a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State for that year.

Question: What is the statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State for that year referred to as?
Answer: The statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State for that year is referred to as the 'annual financial statement'.

Question: What should the estimates of expenditure in the annual financial statement show separately?
Answer: The estimates should show separately the sums required to meet expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State and the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of the State.

Question: What should the sums required to meet expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State and the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of the State be shown separately in?
Answer: The sums should be shown separately in the estimates of expenditure in the annual financial statement.

Question: What expenditure is charged on the Consolidated Fund of each State?
Answer: The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of each State includes the emoluments and allowances of the Governor and other expenditure related to his office, the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, debt charges for which the State is liable and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt, expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of Judges of any High Court, any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal, and any other expenditure declared by this Constitution, or by the Legislature of the State by law, to be so charged.

Question: What does the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of each State include?
Answer: The expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of each State includes the emoluments and allowances of the Governor and other expenditure related to his office, the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, debt charges for which the State is liable and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt, expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of Judges of any High Court, any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal, and any other expenditure declared by this Constitution, or by the Legislature of the State by law, to be so charged.

Question: What is the procedure in the Legislature with respect to estimates?
Answer: The procedure in the Legislature with respect to estimates is that so much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly, but nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in the Legislature of any of those estimates. So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted to the Legislature for approval.

Question: What part of the estimates is not submitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly and what part is submitted for approval?
Answer: So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly, however, this doesn't prevent the discussion of any of those estimates in the Legislature. The part of the estimates that relates to other expenditure is submitted to the Legislature for approval.

Question: Who has the power to assent or refuse to assent to any demand for a grant?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly

Question: What entity has the authority to assent or not assent to demands for a grant?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly

Question: Who recommendation is required for a demand for a grant to be made?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who needs to give a recommendation for a demand for a grant to be made?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What is introduced after the grants have been made by the Assembly?
Answer: A Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of the State

Question: What is introduced after the Assembly grants have been made?
Answer: A Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of the State

Question: Who has the final decision as to whether an amendment is admissible?
Answer: The person presiding

Question: What role does the person presiding have in the admittance of an amendment?
Answer: They have the final decision as to whether an amendment is admissible.

Question: Under what conditions can money be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article

Question: What is the requirement for withdrawing money from the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: The requirement for withdrawing money from the Consolidated Fund of the State is that no money shall be withdrawn except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of the relevant article.

Question: Under what circumstances can the Governor authorise expenditure for a particular service for the current financial year?
Answer: If the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions of article 204 to be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year

Question: What does article 204 imply for the Governor's ability to authorize expenditure for a particular service for the current financial year?
Answer: Article 204 allows the Governor to authorise expenditure for a particular service for the current financial year in cases where the amount authorised by any law is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that year, or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year.

Question: What happens when the expenditure for a service exceeds the granted amount in a financial year?
Answer: A statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure is to be laid before the House or the Houses of the Legislature of the State. Alternatively, a demand for such excess is to be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the State.

Question: What is the procedure when the estimated amount of expenditure for a service exceeds the granted amount in a financial year?
Answer: A statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure is to be laid before the House or the Houses of the Legislature of the State. Alternatively, a demand for such excess is to be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the State.

Question: Which articles have effect in relation to such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys?
Answer: Articles 202, 203 and 204 have effect in relation to such statement, expenditure or demand.

Question: What do Articles 202, 203 and 204 relate to?
Answer: Articles 202, 203 and 204 have effect in relation to a statement, expenditure or demand, and also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys.

Question: What is the power of the Legislative Assembly of a State according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly of a State has the power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year, to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of the State, and to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial year.

Question: What does the Legislative Assembly of a State do in terms of financial grants, according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly of a State has the power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year, to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of the State, and to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial year.

Question: What can the Legislature of the State authorise by law?
Answer: The Legislature of the State can authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes.

Question: What can the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes be authorised by?
Answer: The withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes can be authorised by the Legislature of the State law.

Question: What is the effect of articles 203 and 204 in relation to grants?
Answer: The provisions of articles 203 and 204 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure.

Question: How do the provisions of articles 203 and 204 affect the making of any grant and any law to be made under that clause, especially in relation to the annual financial statement and the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: Articles 203 and 204 have the same effect on the making of any grant and any law to be made under that clause as they do on the making of a grant for any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure.

Question: What are the special provisions about financial Bills?
Answer: A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council. However, no recommendation shall be required for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

Question: What are the rules for introducing or moving a Bill or amendment that makes provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 199? What about for the reduction or abolition of any tax?
Answer: A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 199 cannot be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the Governor, and such a Bill cannot be introduced in a Legislative Council. However, no recommendation is required for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

Question: What conditions must be met for a Bill involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State to be passed?
Answer: A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by a House of the Legislature of the State unless the Governor has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

Question: What is the process for a Bill, which if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State, to be passed by a House of the Legislature of the State?
Answer: The Bill shall not be passed unless the Governor has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

Question: What does article 208 of the constitution provide for?
Answer: Article 208 provides that a House of the Legislature of a State may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its business. Until rules are made under this clause, the existing rules of procedure and standing orders remain in force.

Question: Which article of the constitution states that a House of the Legislature of a State may make rules for regulating its procedure and the conduct of its business, and that until rules are made under this clause, the existing rules of procedure and standing orders remain in force?
Answer: This is provided in Article 208 of the constitution.

Question: Who can modify the effect of the Constitution on the Legislature of the State?
Answer: The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the Chairman of the Legislative Council

Question: What roles have the power to modify the effect of the Constitution on the Legislature of the State?
Answer: The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the Chairman of the Legislative Council

Question: Who can make rules for procedure with respect to communications between the two Houses in a State with a Legislative Council?
Answer: The Governor, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of the Legislative Council

Question: Who consults with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of the Legislative Council to make rules for procedure with respect to communications between the two Houses in a State with a Legislative Council?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who can regulate the procedure of financial business in the Legislature of the State?
Answer: The Legislature of a State

Question: Who has the authority to regulate the procedure of financial business in a State?
Answer: The Legislature of a State

Question: In case of inconsistency between any law and any rule or standing order, which prevails?
Answer: The provision of any law prevails

Question: Which prevails in case of inconsistency between any law and any rule or standing order?
Answer: The provision of any law prevails

Question: What languages can be used in the transaction of business in the Legislature of a State?
Answer: The official language or languages of the State, Hindi, or English

Question: What languages, including State's official language, Hindi and English, can be used for conducting business in the State Legislature?
Answer: The official language or languages of the State, Hindi, or English

Question: Who can permit a member to address the House in his mother-tongue if he cannot adequately express himself in the official languages?
Answer: The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, Chairman of the Legislative Council, or person acting as such

Question: Who is responsible for permitting a member to address the House in his mother-tongue if he cannot adequately express himself in the official languages?
Answer: The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, Chairman of the Legislative Council, or person acting as such

Question: What happens after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: This article shall have effect as if the words 'or in English' were omitted therefrom.

Question: What is the effect of the article after a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: After fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, the article shall have effect as if the words 'or in English' were omitted therefrom.

Question: What is the exception for the Legislatures of the States of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura?
Answer: This clause shall have effect as if for the words 'fifteen years' occurring therein, the words 'twenty-five years' were substituted.

Question: What is the effect of the clause for the Legislatures of the States of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura?
Answer: This clause shall have effect as if for the words 'fifteen years' occurring therein, the words 'twenty-five years' were substituted.

Question: What is the exception for the Legislatures of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Mizoram?
Answer: This clause shall have effect as if for the words 'fifteen years' occurring therein, the words 'forty years' were substituted.

Question: What happens to the clause related to the Legislatures of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Mizoram if the words 'forty years' were substituted for 'fifteen years'?
Answer: This clause shall have effect as the exception.

Question: What restriction is placed on discussion in the Legislature?
Answer: No discussion shall take place in the Legislature of a State with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.

Question: What is the conduct that is not allowed to be discussed in the Legislature of a State?
Answer: The conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties is not allowed to be discussed in the Legislature of a State.

Question: Can the validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State be questioned?
Answer: The validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

Question: On what grounds can the validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State not be called into question?
Answer: The validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

Question: Can an officer or member of the Legislature of a State be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise of their powers?
Answer: No officer or member of the Legislature of a State in whom powers are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.

Question: Who is not subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise of their powers, as vested by or under the Constitution for regulating procedure, conducting business, or maintaining order in the Legislature of a State?
Answer: No officer or member of the Legislature of a State is subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise of those powers.

Question: What is the power of the Governor during the recess of the Legislature?
Answer: If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require.

Question: When can the Governor promulgate Ordinances?
Answer: The Governor can promulgate Ordinances when the Legislative Assembly of a State is not in session or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses of the Legislature are not in session, if he is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action.

Question: Under what conditions can an Ordinance not be promulgated without instructions from the President?
Answer: (a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have required the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof into the Legislature; (b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same provisions for the consideration of the President; (c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received the assent of the President.

Question: What are the conditions in the constitution that would require an Ordinance to have the President's sanction or to be reserved for the President's consideration before promulgation?
Answer: The conditions include: (a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have required the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof into the Legislature; (b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same provisions for the consideration of the President; (c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received the assent of the President.

Question: What force does an Ordinance promulgated under this article have?
Answer: An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor.

Question: What is the equivalence of an Ordinance promulgated under a certain article in terms of legislative force and effect?
Answer: It is equivalent to an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor.

Question: What happens to an Ordinance once it is laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State?
Answer: It shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly and agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing of the resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution being agreed to by the Council.

Question: When does an Ordinance laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State cease to operate? What happens if a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly and agreed to by the Legislative Council?
Answer: An Ordinance shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature. If before the expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly and agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, it ceases to operate upon the passing of the resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution being agreed to by the Council.

Question: Can an Ordinance be withdrawn?
Answer: An Ordinance may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.

Question: Who has the authority to withdraw an Ordinance at any time?
Answer: The Governor has the authority to withdraw an Ordinance at any time.

Question: When is an Ordinance under this article void?
Answer: If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, it shall be void.

Question: What happens if an Ordinance under this article makes any provision which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor?
Answer: It shall be void.

Question: What is the role of an Ordinance promulgated in the Concurrent List?
Answer: It is deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the State which has been reserved for the consideration of the President and assented to by him.

Question: What is the status of an Ordinance promulgated in the Concurrent List after it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and assented to by him?
Answer: It is deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the State.

Question: What is the structure of High Courts according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges as the President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint.

Question: Who makes the decision to appoint judges to the High Courts in India, and what does the court composition consist of?
Answer: The President of India has the power to appoint judges as he deems necessary. The High Court consists of a Chief Justice and other judges appointed by the President.

Question: What is the age limit for a Judge of a High Court?
Answer: The age limit for a Judge of a High Court is sixty-two years.

Question: What position has an age limit of sixty-two years?
Answer: A Judge of a High Court has an age limit of sixty-two years.

Question: What are the conditions for resignation or removal of a Judge of a High Court?
Answer: A Judge may resign by writing under his hand addressed to the President. A Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: How can a Judge of a High Court resign or be removed from his office?
Answer: A Judge may resign by writing under his hand addressed to the President. He may be removed from his office by the President in the manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: What is the qualification for appointment as a Judge of a High Court?
Answer: A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court unless he is a citizen of India and has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory.

Question: What does a person need to be a citizen of and what judicial position must they have held for at least ten years to qualify for appointment as a Judge of a High Court?
Answer: A person needs to be a citizen of India and have held a judicial office in the territory for at least ten years to qualify for appointment as a Judge of a High Court.

Question: What is included in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the territory of India?
Answer: There shall be included any period, after he has held any judicial office, during which the person has been an advocate of a High Court or has held the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law

Question: What does it mean for a person to have held a judicial office in the territory of India, considering their professional history?
Answer: It means that not only the period during which they directly held a judicial office is included, but also any period after that during which they have been an advocate of a High Court, held the office of a member of a tribunal, or any post under the Union or a State that requires special knowledge of law.

Question: What is included in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate of a High Court?
Answer: There shall be included any period during which the person has held judicial office or the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law after he became an advocate

Question: What should be included in the period during which a person has been an advocate of a High Court, if the person has held a judicial office or the office of a member of a tribunal or any post under the Union or a State requiring special knowledge of law?
Answer: There shall be included any period during which the person has held judicial office or the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law after he became an advocate

Question: What is included in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the territory of India or been an advocate of a High Court, before the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: There shall be included any period before the commencement of this Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any area which was comprised before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as defined by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has been an advocate of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be

Question: What does it mean for a person to have held judicial office in the territory of India or been an advocate of a High Court, before the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: It means that there shall be included any period before the commencement of this Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any area which was comprised before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as defined by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has been an advocate of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be.

Question: Who decides any question that arises as to the age of a Judge of a High Court?
Answer: The question shall be decided by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the decision of the President shall be final

Question: Who does the President consult with before deciding any question about the age of a High Court Judge and whose decision is final?
Answer: The President consults with the Chief Justice of India before deciding any question about the age of a High Court Judge and the President's decision is final.

Question: Which provisions of article 124 apply in relation to a High Court?
Answer: The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of article 124 shall apply in relation to a High Court as they apply in relation to the Supreme Court with the substitution of references to the High Court for references to the Supreme Court

Question: To which court do the provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of article 124 apply, with the substitution of references to the High Court for references to the Supreme Court?
Answer: The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of article 124 apply to the High Court.

Question: What must a judge do before entering his office according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: A judge must make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the Governor of the State, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

Question: Who must a judge make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before and according to what schedule in the Constitution of India prior to entering office?
Answer: A judge must make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before the Governor of the State, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

Question: What restrictions are placed on a person after holding office as a permanent judge of a High Court in India?
Answer: No person who has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court is allowed to plead or act in any court or before any authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.

Question: Where can a person who has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court in India plead or act?
Answer: A person who has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court in India can only plead or act in the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.

Question: What does the term 'High Court' exclude according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The term 'High Court' does not include a High Court for a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.

Question: Which High Court is excluded from the term 'High Court' according to the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956 in India?
Answer: A High Court for a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956 is excluded from the term 'High Court'.

Question: Who determines the salaries of the Judges of each High Court in India?
Answer: The salaries of the Judges of each High Court are determined by Parliament by law.

Question: Who is responsible for determining the salaries of the Judges of each High Court by law in India?
Answer: Parliament is responsible for determining the salaries of the Judges of each High Court in India.

Question: What allowances and rights are Judges entitled to?
Answer: Every Judge is entitled to such allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined by or under law made by Parliament.

Question: Who is entitled to allowances, leave of absence, and pension as determined by or under law made by Parliament?
Answer: Every Judge is entitled to these allowances and rights.

Question: Can the allowances of a Judge or his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension be varied after his appointment?
Answer: Neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension can be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

Question: Can either the allowances of a Judge or his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment?
Answer: No, neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension can be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

Question: Who can transfer a Judge from one High Court to another?
Answer: The President, on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission, can transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other High Court.

Question: Who recommends the transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another to the President?
Answer: The National Judicial Appointments Commission recommends the transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another to the President.

Question: Who determines the compensatory allowance of a Chief Justice when not determined by law?
Answer: The President

Question: Who is responsible for determining the compensatory allowance of a Chief Justice when not determined by law?
Answer: The President

Question: Who performs the duties of the Chief Justice of a High Court when the office is vacant or the Chief Justice is unable to perform his duties?
Answer: One of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint

Question: Who does the President appoint to perform the duties of the Chief Justice of a High Court when the office is vacant or the Chief Justice is unable to perform his duties?
Answer: One of the other Judges of the Court

Question: Under what conditions can the President increase the number of Judges in a High Court?
Answer: If there is a temporary increase in the business of a High Court or because of arrears of work therein

Question: Why might the President increase the number of Judges in a High Court?
Answer: The President can increase the number of Judges in a High Court if there is a temporary increase in the business of a High Court or because of arrears of work therein.

Question: For how long can a person be appointed as an additional Judge of a High Court?
Answer: For a period not exceeding two years

Question: What is the maximum duration for which a person can be appointed as an additional Judge of a High Court?
Answer: For a period not exceeding two years

Question: What is the age limit for a person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court?
Answer: Sixty-two years

Question: What is the maximum age for a person to be appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court?
Answer: Sixty-two years

Question: Who can request the appointment of a retired Judge at the sittings of High Courts?
Answer: The National Judicial Appointments Commission on a reference made by the Chief Justice of a High Court

Question: Who can make a reference to the National Judicial Appointments Commission for the appointment of a retired judge at the sittings of High Courts?
Answer: The Chief Justice of a High Court

Question: What allowances is a person entitled to when requested to act as a High Court Judge according to this text?
Answer: The person is entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine.

Question: Who determines the allowances for a person requested to act as a High Court Judge?
Answer: The President determines the allowances.

Question: Does a person requested to act as a High Court Judge have to consent to do so?
Answer: No, the person does not have to consent to act as a High Court Judge.

Question: Does a person required to act as a High Court Judge have the freedom to decline?
Answer: Yes, the person can decline to act as a High Court Judge.

Question: What powers do existing High Courts have according to this text?
Answer: Existing High Courts have the jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court, and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting alone or in Division Courts.

Question: What does the jurisdiction and law administered by existing High Courts include, along with the powers of the Judges in relation to the administration of justice?
Answer: Existing High Courts have the jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court, and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting alone or in Division Courts.

Question: Are there any restrictions on the original jurisdiction of High Courts with respect to revenue matters?
Answer: Any restriction to which the exercise of original jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with respect to any matter concerning the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall no longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.

Question: What happened to the restrictions that were imposed on the original jurisdiction of the High Courts with respect to revenue matters or acts ordered or done in the collection thereof prior to the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Any restriction to which the exercise of original jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with respect to any matter concerning the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall no longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.

Question: What power do High Courts have in relation to issuing writs?
Answer: Every High Court shall have power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.

Question: What does the enforcement of rights conferred by Part III entail and who has the power to issue directions, orders, or writs like habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari within their territories?
Answer: Every High Court has the power to enforce any of the rights conferred by Part III and to issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, within their territories directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari.

Question: Who can exercise the power to issue directions, orders or writs to any Government, authority or person?
Answer: Any High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of such power.

Question: Who can exercise the power to issue directions, orders or writs to any government, authority or person within the territories where the cause of action arises, wholly or in part?
Answer: Any High Court exercising jurisdiction can exercise such power.

Question: What must a party do to make an application to the High Court for the vacation of an interim order?
Answer: The party must furnish a copy of such application to the party in whose favour such order has been made or the counsel of such party.

Question: Who must a party furnish a copy of their application to when applying to the High Court for the vacation of an interim order?
Answer: The party must furnish a copy of such application to the party in whose favour such order has been made or the counsel of such party.

Question: When will the High Court dispose of the application for the vacation of an interim order?
Answer: The High Court shall dispose of the application within a period of two weeks from the date on which it is received or from the date on which the copy of such application is so furnished, whichever is later.

Question: What is the timeframe within which the High Court should dispose of an application for the vacation of an interim order?
Answer: The High Court should dispose of the application within a period of two weeks from the date on which it is received or from the date on which the copy of such application is so furnished, whichever is later.

Question: What happens if the application for the vacation of an interim order is not disposed of within the stipulated time?
Answer: The interim order shall, on the expiry of that period, or, as the case may be, the expiry of the said next day, stand vacated.

Question: What happens to the interim order when the stipulated period, or the said next day expires, and the application for its vacation hasn't been disposed of?
Answer: The interim order shall stand vacated.

Question: Does the power conferred on a High Court by this article derogate the power conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32?
Answer: No, the power conferred on a High Court by this article shall not be in derogation of the power conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.

Question: Does the power conferred on a High Court by a certain article stand in derogation of the power given to the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32?
Answer: No, it does not.

Question: What was repealed by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 8?
Answer: The Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in proceedings under article 226 was repealed.

Question: Which amendment repealed the constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in proceedings under article 226?
Answer: The Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 8

Question: Who has the power of superintendence over all courts?
Answer: The High Court has the power of superintendence over all courts.

Question: What entity has the power of superintendence over all courts?
Answer: The High Court

Question: What can the High Court do according to the provided text?
Answer: The High Court can call for returns from such courts, make and issue general rules, prescribe forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of such courts, prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the officers of any such courts, and settle tables of fees to be allowed to the sheriff and all clerks and officers of such courts and to attorneys, advocates and pleaders practising therein.

Question: What are the responsibilities and powers of the High Court such as regulating practices and proceedings, prescribing forms, and settling tables of fees?
Answer: The High Court can call for returns from such courts, make and issue general rules, prescribe forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of such courts, prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the officers of any such courts, and settle tables of fees to be allowed to the sheriff and all clerks and officers of such courts and to attorneys, advocates and pleaders practising therein.

Question: What conditions must rules, forms, or tables settled by the High Court meet?
Answer: Any rules made, forms prescribed or tables settled under clause (2) or clause (3) shall not be inconsistent with the provision of any law for the time being in force, and shall require the previous approval of the Governor.

Question: What is the consistency and approval requirement for any rules made, forms prescribed, or tables settled under clause (2) or clause (3) by the High Court?
Answer: They shall not be inconsistent with the provision of any law for the time being in force, and shall require the previous approval of the Governor.

Question: What is the High Court not deemed to confer on?
Answer: The High Court is not deemed to confer on powers of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.

Question: What is the High Court not allowed to superintend over according to law?
Answer: The High Court is not allowed to superintend over any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.

Question: When can a case be transferred to the High Court?
Answer: A case can be transferred to the High Court if it is satisfied that a case pending in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case.

Question: Under what conditions is a case pending in a court subordinate to the High Court transferred to it?
Answer: A case is transferred to the High Court if it involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case.

Question: What can the High Court do after withdrawing a case?
Answer: After withdrawing a case, the High Court can either dispose of the case itself, or determine the said question of law and return the case to the court from which the case has been so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such question. The said court shall on receipt thereof proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment.

Question: What happens when the High Court disposes of a case itself or determines the said question of law, after withdrawing a case?
Answer: When the High Court disposes of a case itself after withdrawing it, or determines the said question of law, it can return the case to the court from which the case has been so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such question. The said court shall on receipt thereof proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment.

Question: Who appoints the officers and servants of a High Court?
Answer: The Chief Justice of the Court or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he may direct.

Question: Who has the authority to direct the appointment of officers and servants in a High Court?
Answer: The Chief Justice of the Court

Question: Under what condition can a person not already attached to the Court be appointed to any office connected with the Court?
Answer: The Governor of the State may by rule require that in such cases as may be specified in the rule no person not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court save after consultation with the State Public Service Commission.

Question: What rule may the Governor of the State implement regarding the appointment of individuals not already attached to the Court to any office connected with the Court?
Answer: The Governor of the State may by rule require that in such cases as may be specified in the rule no person not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court save after consultation with the State Public Service Commission.

Question: Who prescribes the conditions of service of officers and servants of a High Court?
Answer: The conditions of service of officers and servants of a High Court shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of the Court or by some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice.

Question: Who is authorized to make rules prescribing the conditions of service for officers and servants of a High Court?
Answer: The Chief Justice of the Court or some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice is authorized to make rules prescribing the conditions of service for officers and servants of a High Court.

Question: What does the administrative expenses of a High Court include?
Answer: The administrative expenses of a High Court include all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court.

Question: What do the salaries, allowances, and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court refer to in the context of High Court expenses?
Answer: The salaries, allowances, and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court refer to the administrative expenses of a High Court.

Question: What is charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: The administrative expenses of a High Court, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court, are charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State.

Question: What are the administrative expenses of a High Court, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court, charged upon?
Answer: The administrative expenses of a High Court are charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State.

Question: Who can extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory?
Answer: Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.

Question: Who has the power to by law extend or exclude a High Court's jurisdiction over Union territories?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who is referred to in place of the Governor in relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in a Union territory?
Answer: The reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that territory, be construed as a reference to the President.

Question: Who does the reference in article 227 pertain to in relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in a union territory?
Answer: The reference in article 227 pertains to the President.

Question: Who can establish a common High Court for two or more States or Union territories?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who has the authority to establish a common High Court for two or more States or Union territories?
Answer: Parliament

Question: In article 227, who is referred to as the Governor in relation to rules for subordinate courts?
Answer: The Governor of the State in which the subordinate courts are situated

Question: Who is referred to as the Governor of the State in which the subordinate courts are situated, in article 227?
Answer: The Governor

Question: How are the references in articles 219 and 229 construed?
Answer: As a reference to the State in which the High Court has its principal seat

Question: What does the reference in articles 219 and 229 refer to?
Answer: The State in which the High Court has its principal seat

Question: What happens if the principal seat of the High Court is in a Union territory?
Answer: The references in articles 219 and 229 to the Governor, Public Service Commission, Legislature and Consolidated Fund of the State are construed as references to the President, Union Public Service Commission, Parliament and Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: What are the references in articles 219 and 229 construed as if the principal seat of the High Court is in a Union territory?
Answer: The references are construed as references to the President, Union Public Service Commission, Parliament and Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: Who is responsible for the appointment, posting and promotion of district judges in any State?
Answer: The Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State

Question: Who does the Governor of the State consult with for the appointment, posting and promotion of district judges in their State?
Answer: The High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State

Question: Who is eligible to be appointed a district judge?
Answer: A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State who has been an advocate or a pleader for not less than seven years and is recommended by the High Court for appointment.

Question: What are the qualifications and requirements for a person not in the service of the Union or of the State to be recommended by the High Court for appointment as a district judge?
Answer: They must have been an advocate or a pleader for not less than seven years.

Question: What does article 233A validate?
Answer: The appointments of, and judgments, etc., delivered by, certain district judges

Question: Which article validates the appointments of, and judgments, etc., delivered by, certain district judges?
Answer: Article 233A

Question: When was the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act commenced?
Answer: 1966

Question: What significant constitutional act commenced in 1966?
Answer: The Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act

Question: What will be deemed illegal or void according to the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966?
Answer: Any appointment, posting, promotion or transfer made at any time before the commencement of the Act, otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235

Question: What is considered illegal or void under the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, in terms of appointments, postings, promotions, or transfers made prior to the commencement of the Act?
Answer: Any appointment, posting, promotion or transfer made at any time before the commencement of the Act, otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235

Question: What will not be deemed illegal or invalid according to the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966?
Answer: No jurisdiction exercised, no judgment, decree, sentence or order passed or made, and no other act or proceeding done or taken, before the commencement of the Act by, or before, any person appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as a district judge in any State otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235

Question: What activities performed by a district judge in any State, before the commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, will not be deemed illegal or invalid?
Answer: No jurisdiction exercised, no judgment, decree, sentence or order passed or made, and no other act or proceeding done or taken, before the commencement of the Act by, or before, any person appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as a district judge in any State otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235

Question: Who makes the appointments of persons other than district judges to the judicial service of a State?
Answer: The Governor of the State

Question: Who is responsible for appointing persons other than district judges to the judicial service in a state?
Answer: The Governor of the State

Question: Who has control over district courts and courts subordinate thereto?
Answer: The High Court

Question: What entity has control over district courts and courts subordinate thereto?
Answer: The High Court

Question: What rights does article 235 of the Constitution not take away from a person belonging to the judicial service of a State?
Answer: Any right of appeal which he may have under the law regulating the conditions of his service

Question: Under article 235 of the Constitution, what is a right that a person belonging to the judicial service of a State retains?
Answer: Any right of appeal which he may have under the law regulating the conditions of his service

Question: What does the expression 'district judge' include according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The expression 'district judge' includes judge of a city civil court, additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge, chief judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions judge and assistant sessions Judge.

Question: Who are the roles included under the term 'district judge' according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The term 'district judge' includes judge of a city civil court, additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge, chief judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions judge and assistant sessions Judge.

Question: What is meant by 'judicial service' as per the Indian Constitution?
Answer: 'Judicial service' means a service consisting exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge and other civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge.

Question: What posts does the 'judicial service' consist of according to the Indian Constitution?
Answer: 'Judicial service' consists of persons intended to fill the post of district judge and other civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge.

Question: Who has the authority to apply the provisions of the Chapter to certain class or classes of magistrates?
Answer: The Governor has the authority to apply the provisions of the Chapter to certain class or classes of magistrates.

Question: Who applies the provisions of the Chapter to certain class or classes of magistrates?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who administers every Union territory as per the Indian Constitution?
Answer: Every Union territory shall be administered by the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through an administrator to be appointed by him with such designation as he may specify.

Question: Who appoints the administrator for a Union territory and how much control do they have as per the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The President appoints the administrator for a Union territory and he can act to such extent as he thinks fit.

Question: Can the President appoint the Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoining Union territory?
Answer: Yes, the President may appoint the Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoining Union territory.

Question: Is it possible for the Governor of a State to be appointed as the administrator of an adjoining Union territory by the President?
Answer: Yes, the President may appoint the Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoining Union territory.

Question: Who can create a body to function as a Legislature for the Union territory?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What entity has the power to create a body to function as a Legislature for the Union territory?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What name is given to the Union territory of Delhi after the commencement of the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991?
Answer: National Capital Territory of Delhi

Question: What was Delhi called after the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 came into effect?
Answer: National Capital Territory of Delhi

Question: Who is appointed as the administrator of the National Capital Territory of Delhi?
Answer: Lieutenant Governor

Question: What is the position of the person who is appointed as the administrator of the National Capital Territory of Delhi?
Answer: Lieutenant Governor

Question: What kind of Assembly is there for the National Capital Territory?
Answer: Legislative Assembly

Question: What does the National Capital Territory have in terms of a governing body?
Answer: Legislative Assembly

Question: How are the seats in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory filled?
Answer: By members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies

Question: What is the method for selecting members for the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory?
Answer: Members are chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies

Question: Who regulates the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, and the division of the National Capital Territory into territorial constituencies?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What entity is responsible for regulating the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, and the division of the National Capital Territory into territorial constituencies?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What articles apply in relation to the National Capital Territory, the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory and the members thereof as they apply, in relation to a State, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the members thereof respectively?
Answer: Articles 324 to 327 and 329

Question: Which articles of the constitution apply to both the National Capital Territory, its Legislative Assembly and the members thereof, as well as a State, its Legislative Assembly and the members thereof?
Answer: Articles 324 to 327 and 329

Question: What power does the Legislative Assembly have according to the Constitution?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly has power to make laws for the whole or any part of the National Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such matter is applicable to Union territories except matters with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said Entries 1, 2 and 18.

Question: Which entries in the State List and Concurrent List is the Legislative Assembly not allowed to make laws for according to the Constitution?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly is not allowed to make laws for Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said Entries 1, 2 and 18.

Question: What happens if a provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly is repugnant to a provision of a law made by Parliament?
Answer: If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any matter is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament with respect to that matter, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.

Question: What is the consequence when a law made by the Legislative Assembly is in conflict with a law made by the Parliament, or an earlier law?
Answer: If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any matter is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament with respect to that matter, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.

Question: What can Parliament do at any time with respect to the same matter?
Answer: Parliament can enact at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislative Assembly.

Question: What actions can Parliament take with respect to a law made by the Legislative Assembly at any time?
Answer: Parliament can enact any law related to the same matter, including adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law.

Question: What is the role of the Council of Ministers?
Answer: The Council of Ministers, consisting of not more than ten per cent. of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Minister at the head, aids and advises the Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws.

Question: Who aids and advises the Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws?
Answer: The Council of Ministers, consisting of not more than ten per cent. of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Minister at the head, aids and advises the Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions.

Question: Who has the power to make laws?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly

Question: What is the role of The Legislative Assembly?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly has the power to make laws

Question: In case of a difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers, to whom is the matter referred?
Answer: The President

Question: Who is the matter referred to in case of a difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers?
Answer: The President

Question: Who appoints the Chief Minister?
Answer: The President

Question: Who does the President appoint for the position of Chief Minister?
Answer: The Chief Minister

Question: Who are the Ministers appointed by?
Answer: The President on the advice of the Chief Minister

Question: Who advises the President on the appointment of Ministers?
Answer: The Chief Minister

Question: To whom are the Council of Ministers collectively responsible?
Answer: The Legislative Assembly

Question: Who is collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: The Council of Ministers

Question: What can Parliament do according to Clause 7a?
Answer: Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving effect to, or supplementing the provisions contained in the foregoing clauses and for all matters incidental or consequential thereto.

Question: What does Clause 7a allow the Parliament to do by law?
Answer: Clause 7a allows Parliament to make provisions for giving effect to, or supplementing the provisions contained in the foregoing clauses and for all matters incidental or consequential thereto.

Question: What does the provision of article 239B apply to?
Answer: The National Capital Territory, the Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly

Question: Which article provision applies to the National Capital Territory, the Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: Article 239B

Question: What happens in case of failure of constitutional machinery?
Answer: The President, on receipt of a report from the Lieutenant

Question: Who takes action upon the report from the Lieutenant in case of failure of constitutional machinery?
Answer: The President

Question: Under what circumstances can the President suspend the operation of any provision of article 239AA?
Answer: The President can suspend the operation of any provision of article 239AA if a situation has arisen in which the administration of the National Capital Territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in pursuance of that article, or that for the proper administration of the National Capital Territory it is necessary or expedient so to do.

Question: When can the operation of any provision of article 239AA be suspended by the President for the administration of the National Capital Territory?
Answer: The operation of any provision of article 239AA can be suspended by the President if a situation has arisen in which the administration of the National Capital Territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in pursuance of that article, or that for the proper administration of the National Capital Territory it is necessary or expedient so to do.

Question: What power does the administrator have during the recess of Legislature in the Union territory of Puducherry?
Answer: If the administrator is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require, except after obtaining instructions from the President.

Question: What action can the administrator take in the Union territory of Puducherry during the recess of Legislature when immediate action is necessary, and what approval is required for this?
Answer: The administrator can promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require, but he must obtain instructions from the President.

Question: What is the condition for an Ordinance promulgated under this article to be deemed an Act of the Legislature?
Answer: An Ordinance promulgated under this article in pursuance of instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory which has been duly enacted after complying with the provisions in that behalf contained in any such law.

Question: What is deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory under this article?
Answer: An Ordinance promulgated in pursuance of instructions from the President is deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory which has been duly enacted after complying with the provisions in that behalf contained in any such law.

Question: When is the administrator not allowed to promulgate any Ordinance?
Answer: The administrator shall not promulgate any Ordinance during the period of such dissolution or suspension of the Legislature.

Question: What is the administrator not allowed to do during the period of dissolution or suspension of the Legislature?
Answer: The administrator is not allowed to promulgate any Ordinance.

Question: What happens to an Ordinance according to clause 1 of article 239A?
Answer: The Ordinance shall be laid before the Legislature of the Union territory and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature or if, before the expiration of that period, a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislature, upon the passing of the resolution. It may also be withdrawn at any time by the administrator after obtaining instructions from the President.

Question: What happens to an Ordinance laid before the Legislature of the Union territory according to clause 1 of article 239A, and when does it cease to operate?
Answer: The Ordinance shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature or if, before the expiration of that period, a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislature, upon the passing of the resolution. It may also be withdrawn at any time by the administrator after obtaining instructions from the President.

Question: What happens if an Ordinance under article 239A makes a provision that would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory?
Answer: The Ordinance shall be void.

Question: What is the consequence if an Ordinance under article 239A makes a provision that would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory?
Answer: The Ordinance shall be void.

Question: Under article 240, for which Union territories may the President make regulations?
Answer: The President may make regulations for the Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, and Puducherry.

Question: Which article allows the President to make regulations for the Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, and Puducherry?
Answer: Article 240

Question: What is the provision related to the creation of a body under article 239A for the Union territory of Puducherry?
Answer: When any body is created under article 239A to function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Puducherry, the President shall not make any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature.

Question: What happens when a body is created under article 239A to function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Puducherry?
Answer: The President shall not make any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature.

Question: What can the President do if the body functioning as a Legislature for the Union territory of Puducherry is dissolved or remains suspended?
Answer: The President may, during the period of such dissolution or suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory.

Question: What can the President do for the peace, progress and good government of the Union territory of Puducherry during the period of its Legislature's dissolution or suspension?
Answer: The President may make regulations during the period of such dissolution or suspension.

Question: Can any regulation made by the President under article 240 repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any other law?
Answer: Yes, any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any other law.

Question: Can a regulation made under article 240 repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any other law?
Answer: Yes, any regulation made by the President under article 240 can repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any other law.

Question: What is the power of the President in the Union territory?
Answer: The President can promulgate laws that are for the time being applicable to the Union territory and these laws will have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies to that territory.

Question: What kind of laws can the President promulgate for the Union territory and what is their effect?
Answer: The President can promulgate laws that are for the time being applicable to the Union territory. These laws will have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies to that territory.

Question: What can Parliament constitute for a Union territory?
Answer: Parliament may by law constitute a High Court for a Union territory or declare any court in any such territory to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes of the Constitution.

Question: What can Parliament do by law for a High Court in a Union territory or any court in such territory in terms of the Constitution?
Answer: Parliament may by law constitute a High Court for a Union territory or declare any court in any such territory to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes of the Constitution.

Question: What provisions apply to the High Court in a Union territory?
Answer: The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI apply in relation to every High Court in a Union territory, subject to modifications or exceptions as Parliament may provide.

Question: Which chapter and part of the law applies to the High Court in a Union territory, and who may provide modifications or exceptions to it?
Answer: Chapter V of Part VI applies to the High Court in a Union territory, and modifications or exceptions may be provided by the Parliament.

Question: What is the jurisdiction of a High Court in a Union territory?
Answer: Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law of the appropriate Legislature, a High Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territory shall continue to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory after such commencement.

Question: What happens to the jurisdiction of a High Court in a Union territory after the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956?
Answer: Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law of the appropriate Legislature, a High Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territory shall continue to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory after such commencement.

Question: What power does Parliament have in regards to the jurisdiction of a High Court for a State in relation to Union territory?
Answer: Parliament has the power to extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court for a State to, or from, any Union territory or part thereof.

Question: What can Parliament do in terms of extending or excluding the jurisdiction of a High Court for a State to, or from, any Union territory or part thereof?
Answer: Parliament has the power to extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court for a State in relation to Union territory.

Question: What does the term 'district' mean in Part IX of the constitution?
Answer: In Part IX of the constitution, 'district' means a district in a State.

Question: What is the term used in Part IX of the constitution to refer to a district in a State?
Answer: The term used in Part IX of the constitution to refer to a district in a State is 'district'.

Question: What does 'Gram Sabha' refer to in the constitution?
Answer: 'Gram Sabha' means a body consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of Panchayat at the village level.

Question: What is the body called that consists of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of Panchayat at the village level?
Answer: The body is called 'Gram Sabha'

Question: What is the 'intermediate level' as specified in the constitution?
Answer: 'Intermediate level' means a level between the village and district levels specified by the Governor of a State by public notification to be the intermediate level for the purposes of this Part.

Question: Who specifies the 'intermediate level' between the village and district levels in a state and how is it announced?
Answer: The 'Intermediate level' is specified by the Governor of a state and it is announced by public notification.

Question: What is the definition of 'Panchayat' in the constitution?
Answer: 'Panchayat' means an institution as specified in the constitution.

Question: What does the term 'Panchayat' refer to in the constitution?
Answer: 'Panchayat' refers to an institution as specified in the constitution.

Question: What is the meaning of 'Panchayat area'?
Answer: The territorial area of a Panchayat

Question: What is the term used to describe the territorial area of a Panchayat?
Answer: Panchayat area

Question: What does 'Population' refer to?
Answer: The population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published

Question: What does 'the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published' refer to?
Answer: Population

Question: How is a 'village' defined?
Answer: A village specified by the Governor by public notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part and includes a group of villages so specified

Question: Who specifies a location to be a 'village' and how is it publicly notified?
Answer: The Governor specifies a location to be a 'village' by public notification.

Question: What powers does a Gram Sabha have?
Answer: A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and perform such functions at the village level as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide

Question: Who provides the laws that determine the powers and functions a Gram Sabha can exercise at the village level?
Answer: The Legislature of a State

Question: Where will Panchayats be constituted?
Answer: Panchayats shall be constituted in every State, at the village, intermediate and district levels in accordance with the provisions of this Part

Question: At what levels and in which locations will Panchayats be constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Part?
Answer: Panchayats will be constituted in every State, at the village, intermediate, and district levels.

Question: When may Panchayats at the intermediate level not be constituted?
Answer: Panchayats at the intermediate level may not be constituted in a State having a population not exceeding twenty lakhs

Question: Under what condition may a state not constitute Panchayats at the intermediate level?
Answer: A state may not constitute Panchayats at the intermediate level if its population does not exceed twenty lakhs.

Question: Who can make provisions with respect to the composition of Panchayats?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the composition of Panchayats

Question: Who has the authority to make laws regarding the composition of Panchayats?
Answer: The Legislature of a State

Question: How are the seats in a Panchayat filled?
Answer: All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area

Question: Who fills the seats in a Panchayat and from where are they chosen?
Answer: All the seats in a Panchayat are filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area.

Question: What is the role of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate level?
Answer: The Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate level are part of the Panchayats at the district level.

Question: Who are part of the Panchayats at the district level?
Answer: The Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate level are part of the Panchayats at the district level.

Question: Who are the members of the House of the People and the members of the Legislative Assembly representing?
Answer: They are representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than the village level.

Question: Who represents constituencies which comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than the village level?
Answer: The members of the House of the People and the members of the Legislative Assembly.

Question: Where are the members of the Council of States and the members of the Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within?
Answer: They are registered as electors within a Panchayat area at the intermediate level, in Panchayat at the intermediate level, and a Panchayat area at the district level, in Panchayat at the district level.

Question: Where are individuals registered as electors within a Panchayat area at the intermediate level, in Panchayat at the intermediate level, and a Panchayat area at the district level, in Panchayat at the district level?
Answer: The members of the Council of States and the members of the Legislative Council of the State are registered as electors within these areas.

Question: Who has the right to vote in the meetings of the Panchayats?
Answer: The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other members of a Panchayat whether or not chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area.

Question: Who are the individuals, whether or not chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area, that can vote in the Panchayat meetings?
Answer: The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other members of a Panchayat

Question: How is the Chairperson of a Panchayat at the village level elected?
Answer: The Chairperson of a panchayat at the village level is elected in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

Question: Who provides the law for the manner in which the Chairperson of a panchayat at the village level is elected?
Answer: The Legislature of a State provides the law for the manner in which the Chairperson of a panchayat at the village level is elected.

Question: How is the Chairperson of a Panchayat at the intermediate or district level elected?
Answer: The Chairperson of a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level is elected by, and from amongst, the elected members thereof.

Question: Who elects the Chairperson of a Panchayat at the intermediate or district level?
Answer: The Chairperson of a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level is elected by the elected members thereof.

Question: What is the reservation policy for seats in every Panchayat?
Answer: Seats in every Panchayat shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the total population of that area.

Question: Who are the seats in every Panchayat reserved for and how is the proportion determined?
Answer: Seats in every Panchayat are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The proportion is determined by the population of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area relative to the total population of that area.

Question: What is the reservation policy for women in every Panchayat?
Answer: Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved shall be reserved for women.

Question: What is the minimum percentage of seats reserved for women in every Panchayat?
Answer: One-third of the total number of seats are reserved for women in every Panchayat.

Question: What percentage of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat is reserved for women?
Answer: Not less than one-third

Question: What is the minimum quota for women in the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat?
Answer: Not less than one-third

Question: How are the seats reserved for women in Panchayats allotted?
Answer: By rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat

Question: What is the method used to allot the seats reserved for women in Panchayats?
Answer: By rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat

Question: Who are the offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other level reserved for?
Answer: The Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women

Question: For whom are the offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other level reserved?
Answer: The Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women

Question: What is the method of allotting the number of offices reserved under this clause?
Answer: By rotation to different Panchayats at each level

Question: What is the procedure for allotting the number of offices reserved under a specific clause to different Panchayats at each level?
Answer: The method is by rotation.

Question: When does the reservation of seats and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons cease to have effect?
Answer: On the expiration of the period specified in article 334

Question: What happens on the expiration of the period specified in article 334?
Answer: The reservation of seats and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons cease to have effect.

Question: Can the Legislature of a State make any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in favour of backward class of citizens?
Answer: Yes

Question: Is it possible for the Legislature of a State to make a provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in favour of backward class of citizens?
Answer: Yes

Question: What is the duration of Panchayats according to 243E?
Answer: Every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue

Question: Does a Panchayat continue unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, according to 243E?
Answer: Yes, according to 243E, every Panchayat shall continue unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force.

Question: How long does a Panchayat continue from its first meeting?
Answer: Five years

Question: What is the tenure of a Panchayat from its first meeting?
Answer: Five years

Question: Can an amendment of any law cause the dissolution of a Panchayat?
Answer: No

Question: Does the amendment of any law lead to the dissolution of a Panchayat?
Answer: No

Question: When should an election to constitute a Panchayat be completed?
Answer: Before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1) or before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution

Question: What is the time period before which an election to constitute a Panchayat should be completed after its dissolution or before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1)?
Answer: Before the expiration of a period of six months

Question: What happens if the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued is less than six months?
Answer: It shall not be necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the Panchayat for such period.

Question: What happens when it is not necessary to hold any election for constituting the Panchayat for a certain period?
Answer: This happens if the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued is less than six months.

Question: What is the duration for a Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Panchayat?
Answer: It shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.

Question: What happens to the duration of a new Panchayat that is formed after the dissolution of the previous Panchayat?
Answer: It shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.

Question: What are the disqualifications for being a member of a Panchayat?
Answer: A person shall be disqualified if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned, and if he is disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of the State.

Question: Under what circumstances would a person be disqualified from being a member of a Panchayat according to the law made by the Legislature of the State?
Answer: A person would be disqualified if he is disqualified by or under any law for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned.

Question: Can a person less than twenty-five years of age be a member of a Panchayat?
Answer: No person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years.

Question: What is the minimum age for a person to become a member of a Panchayat?
Answer: A person needs to have attained the age of twenty-one years to become a member of a Panchayat.

Question: What happens if a question arises as to whether a member of a Panchayat has become subject to any of the disqualifications?
Answer: The question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

Question: In case of a dispute regarding a Panchayat member's disqualification, where and how should the matter be resolved?
Answer: The question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

Question: What powers can a State legislature endow the Panchayats with by law?
Answer: The powers and authority necessary to function as institutions of self-government. This may include provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities, preparation of plans for economic development and social justice, and implementation of such schemes.

Question: What does the devolution of powers and responsibilities, preparation of plans for economic development and social justice, and implementation of such schemes refer to in the context of State legislature and Panchayats?
Answer: These refer to the powers that a State legislature can endow the Panchayats with by law, necessary for them to function as institutions of self-government.

Question: What financial powers can a State legislature grant the Panchayats?
Answer: The State legislature can authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees, assign such taxes collected by the State Government to a Panchayat, provide grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State, and provide for constitution of Funds for crediting all moneys received by or on behalf of the Panchayats.

Question: What can a State legislature authorise a Panchayat to do in terms of financial matters?
Answer: The State legislature can authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees, assign such taxes collected by the State Government to a Panchayat, provide grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State, and provide for constitution of Funds for crediting all moneys received by or on behalf of the Panchayats.

Question: What is the role of the Finance Commission according to the Constitution?
Answer: The Finance Commission is constituted by the Governor of a State to review the financial position of the Panchayats and to make recommendations on the principles which should govern the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State.

Question: Who constitutes the Finance Commission and what are its responsibilities regarding the financial position of the Panchayats and the distribution of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State?
Answer: The Finance Commission is constituted by the Governor of a State to review the financial position of the Panchayats and to make recommendations on the principles which should govern the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State.

Question: What is one of the roles of the Finance Commission in relation to Panchayats according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: They are responsible for the allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds, the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Panchayats, the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State, and measures needed to improve the financial position of the Panchayats.

Question: What responsibilities does the Finance Commission have regarding the allocation of shares, determination of taxes, duties, tolls and fees, the grants-in-aid from the Consolidated Fund of the State, and measures to improve the financial position for Panchayats at all levels according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: These are some of the roles of the Finance Commission in relation to Panchayats according to the Constitution of India.

Question: What is the role of the State Election Commission in relation to Panchayats?
Answer: The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats is vested in a State Election Commission.

Question: Who is vested with the superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats?
Answer: The State Election Commission

Question: Who appoints the State Election Commissioner?
Answer: The State Election Commissioner is appointed by the Governor.

Question: Who is appointed by the Governor for the role of State Election Commissioner?
Answer: The State Election Commissioner is appointed by the Governor.

Question: What provisions may the Legislature of a State make with respect to Panchayats?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.

Question: What may the Legislature of a State make provisions for in relation to the Panchayats?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.

Question: Can the State Election Commissioner be removed from his office?
Answer: The State Election Commissioner can be removed from his office, but only in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a High Court.

Question: On what grounds and in what manner can the State Election Commissioner be removed from his office?
Answer: The State Election Commissioner can be removed from his office only in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a High Court.

Question: What is the Governor of a State required to do when requested by the State Election Commission?
Answer: The Governor of a State shall make available to the State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred on the State Election Commission by clause (1).

Question: What is the Governor of a State obliged to provide to the State Election Commission according to clause (1)?
Answer: The Governor of a State is required to make available such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred on the State Election Commission.

Question: What power does the legislature of a State have in relation to elections to the Panchayats?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Panchayats.

Question: What can the Legislature of a State do with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Panchayats?
Answer: The Legislature of a State has the power to make provision by law.

Question: How do the provisions of Part 243L apply to Union territories?
Answer: The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239 and references to the Legislature or the legislative Assembly of a State were references, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly.

Question: How do the references to the Governor of a State and the Legislature or the legislative Assembly of a State change when the provisions of Part 243L are applied to a Union territory?
Answer: When the provisions of Part 243L are applied to a Union territory, the references to the Governor of a State become references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239 and references to the Legislature or the legislative Assembly of a State become references, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly.

Question: What areas does Part 243M not apply to?
Answer: This Part shall not apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244, the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram, the hill areas in the State of Manipur for which District Councils exist under any law for the time being in force, and the hill areas of the District of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal for which Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists under any law for the time being in force.

Question: Which specific regions and states does this law not apply to, as described in its Part 243M?
Answer: Part 243M does not apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244, the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram, the hill areas in the State of Manipur for which District Councils exist under any law for the time being in force, and the hill areas of the District of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal for which Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists under any law for the time being in force.

Question: What does article 243D relate to?
Answer: Reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes.

Question: Which article relates to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes?
Answer: Article 243D

Question: Does article 243D apply to the State of Arunachal Pradesh?
Answer: No.

Question: Is there a state to which article 243D does not apply?
Answer: Yes, Arunachal Pradesh.

Question: What power does the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (2) have according to the Constitution?
Answer: It may, by law, extend this part to that State, except the areas, if any, referred to in clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting.

Question: What is the process for a State Legislature referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (2) to extend a part to that State according to the Constitution?
Answer: The Legislature may, by law, extend this part to that State, except the areas, if any, referred to in clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting.

Question: Can Parliament extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1)?
Answer: Yes, subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law.

Question: What conditions must be met for Parliament to extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1)?
Answer: The conditions must be subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law.

Question: What is the effect of any law relating to Panchayats in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992?
Answer: Any provision of any law relating to Panchayats in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier.

Question: What happens to the provisions of any law relating to Panchayats in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, if they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part?
Answer: Any such provision shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier.

Question: What happens to Panchayats existing immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992?
Answer: All the Panchayats existing immediately before such commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that State.

Question: What will happen to the Panchayats that were in existence immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, and under what conditions can they be dissolved?
Answer: All the Panchayats existing immediately before such commencement will continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that State.

Question: What does section 243-O of the Constitution state?
Answer: It bars interference by courts in electoral matters.

Question: Which section of the Constitution bars interference by courts in electoral matters?
Answer: Section 243-O

Question: What is the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies?
Answer: The validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not be called in question in any court.

Question: Can the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243K, be called into question in any court?
Answer: No, the validity of such a law shall not be called in question in any court.

Question: Can an election to any Panchayat be called in question?
Answer: No election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.

Question: How can an election to a Panchayat be legally questioned?
Answer: An election to any Panchayat can be legally questioned by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.

Question: What is a 'Committee' in the context of Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: A 'Committee' means a Committee constituted under article 243S.

Question: Under which article is a 'Committee' constituted in the context of Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: A 'Committee' is constituted under article 243S.

Question: What is a 'Metropolitan area' according to Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: A 'Metropolitan area' means an area having a population of ten lakhs or more, comprised in one or more districts and consisting of two or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous areas, specified by the Governor by public notification to be a Metropolitan area for the purposes of this Part.

Question: What is the population requirement and structural composition for an area to be designated as a 'Metropolitan area' under Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: An area must have a population of ten lakhs or more, and must be comprised in one or more districts, consisting of two or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous areas to be designated as a 'Metropolitan area' under Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES.

Question: How is 'Municipality' defined in Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: 'Municipality' means an institution of self-government constituted under article 243Q.

Question: Under which article is a 'Municipality', as an institution of self-government, constituted?
Answer: A 'Municipality' is constituted under article 243Q.

Question: What does 'Panchayat' mean in the context of Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: 'Panchayat' means a Panchayat constituted under article 243B.

Question: Under which article is a 'Panchayat' constituted in the context of Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: A 'Panchayat' is constituted under article 243B.

Question: What does 'population' refer to in Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: 'Population' means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Question: What is the meaning of 'population' as per the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published in Part IXA THE MUNICIPALITIES?
Answer: 'Population' refers to the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Question: What will be constituted in every state according to Constitution of Municipalities?
Answer: There shall be constituted in every State a Nagar Panchayat for a transitional area, a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area, and a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area, in accordance with the provisions of this Part.

Question: What kind of municipal bodies will be constituted in every State for transitional areas, smaller urban areas, and larger urban areas according to the Constitution?
Answer: A Nagar Panchayat for a transitional area, a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area, and a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area will be constituted in every State according to the Constitution.

Question: What does 'a transitional area', 'a smaller urban area' or 'a larger urban area' mean in the context of this article?
Answer: These terms refer to areas that the Governor may specify by public notification, considering factors such as population, population density, revenue generated for local administration, percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities, economic importance or other factors deemed fit.

Question: What factors does the Governor consider when specifying areas as 'a transitional area', 'a smaller urban area' or 'a larger urban area'?
Answer: The Governor may consider factors such as population, population density, revenue generated for local administration, percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities, economic importance or other factors deemed fit.

Question: How are the seats in a Municipality filled according to the article?
Answer: All the seats in a Municipality are filled by persons chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area. Each Municipal area is divided into territorial constituencies known as wards.

Question: What are the wards in a Municipal area and how are they filled?
Answer: The wards in a Municipal area are territorial constituencies into which each Municipal area is divided. All the seats in these wards are filled by persons chosen by direct election.

Question: What can the Legislature of a State provide in the representation in a Municipality?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may provide for the representation in a Municipality of people with special knowledge or experience in Municipal administration, members of the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies in the Municipal area, members of the Council of States and the Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within the Municipal area, and the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under clause (5) of article 243S.

Question: Who may the Legislature of a State provide for the representation in a Municipality?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may provide for the representation in a Municipality of people with special knowledge or experience in Municipal administration, members of the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies in the Municipal area, members of the Council of States and the Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within the Municipal area, and the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under clause (5) of article 243S.

Question: What is the provision regarding the election of the Chairperson of a Municipality?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may by law provide the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality.

Question: Who is responsible for providing the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality?
Answer: The Legislature of a State is responsible for providing the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality.

Question: What is the requirement for the constitution of Wards Committees?
Answer: Wards Committees, consisting of one or more wards, should be constituted within the territorial area of a Municipality having a population of three lakhs or more.

Question: What is the population requirement for a Municipality to constitute Wards Committees consisting of one or more wards?
Answer: A Municipality should have a population of three lakhs or more to constitute Wards Committees consisting of one or more wards.

Question: What provisions can the Legislature of a State make regarding a Wards Committee?
Answer: The Legislature of a State can make provisions regarding the composition and the territorial area of a Wards Committee and the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shall be filled.

Question: What aspects of a Wards Committee can the Legislature of a State make provisions about?
Answer: The Legislature of a State can make provisions about the composition, the territorial area, and the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shall be filled.

Question: Who can be a member of a Wards Committee?
Answer: A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the territorial area of the Wards Committee shall be a member of that Committee.

Question: Who is a member of a Wards Committee within the territorial area they represent in a Municipality?
Answer: A member of a Municipality representing a ward within that territorial area is a member of the Wards Committee.

Question: Who can be the Chairperson of a Wards Committee?
Answer: If a Wards Committee consists of one ward, the member representing that ward in the Municipality; or if it consists of two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards in the Municipality elected by the members of the Wards Committee, shall be the Chairperson of that Committee.

Question: Who can be elected as the Chairperson of a Wards Committee if it consists of two or more wards?
Answer: One of the members representing such wards in the Municipality elected by the members of the Wards Committee can be the Chairperson of that Committee.

Question: What is the provision for reservation of seats in a Municipality for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the number of seats so reserved shall bear the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal area bears to the total population of that area. These seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.

Question: How are the seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in a Municipality determined and allocated?
Answer: Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the number of seats so reserved shall bear the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal area bears to the total population of that area. These seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.

Question: What is the provision for reservation of seats for women in a Municipality?
Answer: Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes. Also, not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved for women and these seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.

Question: What is the minimum proportion of seats reserved for women in a Municipality, and how are these seats distributed among the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and general category?
Answer: Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes. Furthermore, not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved for women. These seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.

Question: Who can the Legislature of a State reserve seats for?
Answer: The Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women

Question: For whom can the Legislature of a State reserve seats?
Answer: The Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women

Question: When does the reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons cease to have effect?
Answer: On the expiration of the period specified in article 334

Question: What happens on the expiration of the period specified in article 334?
Answer: The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons cease to have effect

Question: Can the Legislature of a State make any provision for reservation of seats in a Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities?
Answer: Yes, especially in favour of backward class of citizens.

Question: Can the Legislature of a State make provisions for reservation of seats in a Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens?
Answer: Yes

Question: For how long does every Municipality continue unless sooner dissolved under any law?
Answer: Five years from the date appointed for its first meeting

Question: What does the date appointed for the first meeting of a Municipality signify?
Answer: It signifies the start of a five-year tenure unless the Municipality is sooner dissolved under any law

Question: Can an amendment of any law dissolve a Municipality?
Answer: No, no amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at any level.

Question: What effect does an amendment of any law for the time being in force have on the dissolution of a Municipality at any level?
Answer: No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at any level.

Question: When should an election to constitute a Municipality be completed?
Answer: Before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1), and before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution.

Question: What is the timeline for completing a municipality election after its dissolution and before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1)?
Answer: The election should be completed before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution.

Question: For how long does a Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Municipality before the expiration of its duration continue?
Answer: Only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.

Question: If a Municipality is dissolved before the expiration of its duration, for how long does the newly constituted Municipality continue?
Answer: Only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.

Question: What disqualifies a person from being a member of a Municipality according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: A person can be disqualified from being a member of a Municipality if he is disqualified by any law in force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned, or if he is disqualified by any law made by the Legislature of the State. However, no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years.

Question: Under what conditions can a person be disqualified from being a member of a Municipality according to the Constitution of India, and what is the minimum age requirement?
Answer: A person can be disqualified from being a member of a Municipality if he is disqualified by any law in force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned, or if he is disqualified by any law made by the Legislature of the State. The minimum age requirement is twenty-one years.

Question: Who decides if a member of a Municipality has become subject to any of the disqualifications?
Answer: If any question arises as to whether a member of a Municipality has become subject to any of the disqualifications, the question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

Question: What happens if a question arises regarding a member of a Municipality becoming subject to disqualifications?
Answer: The question is referred for the decision of an authority and in a manner as provided by the law of the State's Legislature.

Question: What are the powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may endow the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government. This may include the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice, the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to them, including those related to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.

Question: Who endows the Municipalities with their powers and authorities, and what functions might they be entrusted with according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Legislature of a State endows the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government. This can include the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice, the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to them, including those related to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.

Question: What are the powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may, by law, authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits.

Question: Who authorizes a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls, and fees, and under what conditions?
Answer: The Legislature of a State authorises a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits.

Question: What is the purpose of the Finance Commission constituted under article 243-I?
Answer: The Finance Commission reviews the financial position of the Municipalities and makes recommendations to the Governor on the distribution of proceeds, determination of taxes, duties, tolls and fees, grants-in-aid to the Municipalities, measures needed to improve their financial position, and any other matter referred by the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Municipalities.

Question: Who reviews the financial position of the Municipalities and makes recommendations on the distribution of proceeds, determination of taxes, duties, tolls and fees, grants-in-aid to the Municipalities, measures needed to improve their financial position, and any other matter referred by the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Municipalities?
Answer: The Finance Commission constituted under article 243-I is responsible for this task.

Question: What does the Governor do with the recommendations made by the Commission under article 243Y?
Answer: The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission, together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon, to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

Question: What is the procedure followed by the Governor after receiving recommendations from the Commission under article 243Y?
Answer: The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission, together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon, to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

Question: What provision can the Legislature of a State make with respect to Municipalities according to article 243Z?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.

Question: What can the Legislature of a State do by law with respect to the maintenance and auditing of accounts by the Municipalities, as per a certain article?
Answer: According to article 243Z, the Legislature of a State may make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.

Question: What is the role of the superintendence in relation to Elections to the Municipalities in article 243ZA?
Answer: The superintendence has the direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for the Municipalities.

Question: Who has the direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for the Municipalities as per Article 243ZA?
Answer: The superintendence has the direction and control.

Question: Who is responsible for the conduct of all elections to the Municipalities?
Answer: The State Election Commission referred to in article 243K.

Question: Which entity is referred to in article 243K and is responsible for the conduct of all elections to the Municipalities?
Answer: The State Election Commission

Question: Who can make provision with respect to all matters relating to elections to the Municipalities?
Answer: The Legislature of a State.

Question: What entity is responsible for making provisions with respect to all matters relating to elections to the Municipalities?
Answer: The Legislature of a State.

Question: Do the provisions of this Part apply to Union territories?
Answer: Yes, the provisions of this Part apply to the Union territories.

Question: To what regions do the provisions of this Part apply?
Answer: The provisions of this Part apply to the Union territories.

Question: Who are referred to as the Governor of a State and the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State in the context of a Union territory?
Answer: The Administrator of the Union territory and the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.

Question: What are the Administrator of the Union territory and the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory referred to in the context of a State?
Answer: They are referred to as the Governor of a State and the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State.

Question: Who may direct that the provisions of this Part apply to any Union territory or part thereof?
Answer: The President.

Question: Who has the authority to direct that the provisions of a Part apply to any Union territory or part thereof?
Answer: The President

Question: Does this Part apply to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244?
Answer: No, this Part does not apply to those areas.

Question: Which areas does this Part not apply to?
Answer: This Part does not apply to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244.

Question: What is not affected by this Part?
Answer: The functions and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council.

Question: Which body's functions and powers are not affected by this Part?
Answer: The Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council

Question: Can Parliament extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas?
Answer: Yes, Parliament can extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas.

Question: Who has the authority to extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas?
Answer: Parliament has the authority to extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas.

Question: What is the purpose of the District Planning Committee?
Answer: The purpose of a District Planning Committee is to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole.

Question: What does a District Planning Committee do with the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district?
Answer: A District Planning Committee consolidates the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and prepares a draft development plan for the district as a whole.

Question: What is the minimum proportion of the District Planning Committee's members that should be elected from the Panchayat and Municipalities?
Answer: Not less than four-fifths of the total number of members of the District Planning Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district.

Question: Who elects not less than four-fifths of the total number of members of the District Planning Committee?
Answer: Four-fifths of the total number of members of the District Planning Committee are elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district.

Question: What should the District Planning Committee consider when preparing the draft development plan?
Answer: The District Planning Committee should consider matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation. They should also consider the extent and type of available resources, whether financial or otherwise.

Question: What should the District Planning Committee consider in terms of resources and development, including matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the Municipalities, when preparing the draft development plan?
Answer: The District Planning Committee should consider spatial planning, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation. They should also consider the extent and type of available resources, whether financial or otherwise.

Question: Who does the District Planning Committee consult?
Answer: The District Planning Committee consults such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by order, specify.

Question: Who specifies the institutions and organisations that the District Planning Committee consults?
Answer: The Governor specifies the institutions and organisations that the District Planning Committee consults.

Question: What happens to the development plan once it's recommended by the District Planning Committee?
Answer: The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.

Question: Who forwards the development plan recommended by the District Planning Committee to the Government of the State?
Answer: The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee forwards the development plan.

Question: What is the purpose of the Metropolitan Planning Committee?
Answer: The purpose of the Metropolitan Planning Committee is to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.

Question: Which committee is responsible for preparing a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole?
Answer: The Metropolitan Planning Committee is responsible for preparing a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.

Question: What is the minimum proportion of Committee members that should be elected from the municipalities and panchayats?
Answer: Two-thirds

Question: What proportion of Committee members should be elected from the municipalities and panchayats?
Answer: Two-thirds

Question: What is the role of the Metropolitan Planning Committee in preparing the draft development plan?
Answer: It is to regard to the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the Panchayats, matters of common interest, the overall objectives and priorities set by the Government of India and the State, investments likely to be made and other available resources. They are also to consult such institutions and organisations as specified by the Governor.

Question: What factors does the Metropolitan Planning Committee consider when preparing the draft development plan, and who are they required to consult?
Answer: The Metropolitan Planning Committee considers the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the Panchayats, matters of common interest, the overall objectives and priorities set by the Government of India and the State, investments likely to be made and other available resources. They are required to consult such institutions and organisations as specified by the Governor.

Question: Who should the Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee forward the development plan to?
Answer: The Government of the State

Question: Who does the development plan of every Metropolitan Planning Committee get forwarded to by the Chairperson?
Answer: The Government of the State

Question: What are the functions that can be assigned to the Metropolitan Planning Committees?
Answer: Functions relating to planning and coordination for the Metropolitan area

Question: To whom can the functions relating to planning and coordination for the Metropolitan area be assigned?
Answer: The functions can be assigned to the Metropolitan Planning Committees

Question: How should the Chairpersons of such Committees be chosen?
Answer: The manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen is not specified in the provided text.

Question: Is the method of selecting the Chairpersons of such Committees specified in the provided text?
Answer: No, the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen is not specified in the provided text.

Question: What happens to municipalities in force inconsistent with the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992?
Answer: They continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier.

Question: How long do municipalities inconsistent with the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 continue to be in force?
Answer: They continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier.

Question: What is the provision for municipalities existing before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992?
Answer: All the Municipalities existing immediately before such commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that State.

Question: What happens to the Municipalities that existed immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992?
Answer: All the Municipalities existing immediately before such commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that State.

Question: What does article 243ZG state about the interference by courts in electoral matters?
Answer: It states that the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not be called in question in any court. Also, no election to any Municipality shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.

Question: What does Article 243ZG state about the validity of laws relating to delimitation of constituencies and the questioning of elections in any municipality?
Answer: Article 243ZG states that the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not be called in question in any court. Also, no election to any Municipality shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.

Question: What does 'authorised person' mean in the context of Part IX-B THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES?
Answer: An 'authorised person' refers to a person referred to as such in Article 243-ZQ.

Question: Who is referred to as the 'authorised person' in Article 243-ZQ?
Answer: The 'authorised person' in Article 243-ZQ is a term used in the context of Part IX-B THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES.

Question: What is the definition of 'board' in the context of co-operative societies?
Answer: A 'board' refers to the board of directors or the governing body of a co-operative society, by whatever name called, to which the direction and control of the management of the affairs of a society is entrusted to.

Question: To whom is the direction and control of the management of the affairs of a co-operative society entrusted?
Answer: The direction and control of the management of the affairs of a co-operative society is entrusted to the 'board' or the board of directors or the governing body, by whatever name called.

Question: What is a 'co-operative society' as defined in the Constitution?
Answer: A 'co-operative society' is a society registered or deemed to be registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State.

Question: Under which law should a society be registered or deemed to be registered for it to be considered a 'co-operative society'?
Answer: A society should be registered or deemed to be registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State to be considered a 'co-operative society'.

Question: What is a 'multi-State co-operative society'?
Answer: A 'multi-State co-operative society' is a society with objects not confined to one State and registered.

Question: What type of society has objects not confined to one State and is registered?
Answer: A 'multi-State co-operative society' is a society with objects not confined to one State and registered.

Question: What does 'officer bearer' mean in the context of a co-operative society?
Answer: An 'officer bearer' refers to a President, Vice-President, Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer of a co-operative society and includes any other person to be elected by the board of any co-operative society.

Question: Who does the term 'officer bearer' include in a co-operative society?
Answer: An 'officer bearer' refers to a President, Vice-President, Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer of a co-operative society and includes any other person to be elected by the board of any co-operative society.

Question: Who is the 'Registrar' as mentioned in the text?
Answer: The 'Registrar' refers to the Central Registrar appointed by the Central Government in relation to the multi-State co-operative societies and the Registrar for co-operative societies appointed by the State Government under the law made by the Legislature of a State in relation to co-operative societies.

Question: Who appoints the Central Registrar and the Registrar for co-operative societies, as per the law made by the Legislature of a State in relation to co-operative societies?
Answer: The Central Registrar is appointed by the Central Government and the Registrar for co-operative societies is appointed by the State Government.

Question: What is a 'State Act'?
Answer: A 'State Act' means any law made by the Legislature of a State.

Question: Who makes any law referred to as a 'State Act'?
Answer: The Legislature of a State makes any law referred to as a 'State Act'.

Question: What is a 'State level co-operative society'?
Answer: A 'State level co-operative society' is a co-operative society having its area of operation extending to the whole of a State and defined as such in any law made by the Legislature of a State.

Question: What is the area of operation for a 'State level co-operative society' and how is it defined?
Answer: The area of operation for a 'State level co-operative society' extends to the whole of a State and it is defined as such in any law made by the Legislature of a State.

Question: What does the legislation 243-ZI state?
Answer: Legislation 243-ZI states that the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of co-operative societies based on the principles of voluntary formation, democratic member-control, member-economic participation and autonomous functioning.

Question: Which legislation states that a State's Legislature may make provisions for the incorporation, regulation, and winding up of co-operative societies based on voluntary formation, democratic member-control, member-economic participation, and autonomous functioning?
Answer: Legislation 243-ZI states that.

Question: What is the maximum number of directors a co-operative society can have according to the legislation?
Answer: According to the legislation, the maximum number of directors of a co-operative society shall not exceed twenty-one.

Question: According to the legislation, how many directors can a co-operative society have at maximum?
Answer: A co-operative society can have a maximum of twenty-one directors according to the legislation.

Question: What reservations does the law provide for on the board of a co-operative society?
Answer: The law provides for the reservation of one seat for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and two seats for women on the board of every co-operative society consisting of individuals as members and having members from such class or category of persons.

Question: How many seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and for women on the board of a co-operative society consisting of individuals as members and having members from such class or category of persons?
Answer: One seat is reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and two seats are reserved for women.

Question: What is the term of office for the elected members of the board and its office bearers in a co-operative society?
Answer: The term of office of elected members of the board and its office bearers in a co-operative society is five years from the date of election.

Question: How long is the term of office for elected members of the board and its office bearers in a co-operative society from the date of election?
Answer: The term of office is five years.

Question: What happens when there is a casual vacancy on the board?
Answer: The board may fill a casual vacancy on the board by nomination out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual vacancy has arisen, if the term of office of the board is less than half of its original term.

Question: How can the board fill a casual vacancy if the term of office of the board is less than half of its original term?
Answer: The board may fill a casual vacancy on the board by nomination out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual vacancy has arisen.

Question: Who can be co-opted as members of the board?
Answer: The Legislature of a State shall, by law, make provisions for co-option of persons to be members of the board having experience in the field of banking, management, finance or specialisation in any other field relating to the objects and activities undertaken by the co-operative society.

Question: What qualifications or experience should a person have to be co-opted as a member of the board of a co-operative society, according to the provisions made by the Legislature of a State?
Answer: A person should have experience in the field of banking, management, finance or specialisation in any other field relating to the objects and activities undertaken by the co-operative society.

Question: What is the maximum number of co-opted members allowed on the board?
Answer: The number of such co-opted members shall not exceed two in addition to twenty-one directors.

Question: How many directors are there on the board, in addition to the maximum of two co-opted members?
Answer: There are twenty-one directors on the board in addition to the maximum of two co-opted members.

Question: Do co-opted members have the right to vote?
Answer: Co-opted members shall not have the right to vote in any election of the co-operative society in their capacity as such member or to be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the board.

Question: Can co-opted members be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the board or vote in any election of the co-operative society?
Answer: No, co-opted members do not have the right to vote in any election of the co-operative society or to be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the board in their capacity as such member.

Question: Who oversees the preparation of electoral rolls and the conduct of elections to a co-operative society?
Answer: The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society shall vest in such an authority or body, as may be provided by the Legislature of a State, by law.

Question: Where does the superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society vest?
Answer: The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society vests in such an authority or body, as may be provided by the Legislature of a State, by law.

Question: When should the election of a board be conducted?
Answer: The election of a board shall be conducted before the expiry of the term of the board so as to ensure that the newly elected members of the board assume office immediately on the expiry of the office of members of the outgoing board.

Question: What is the purpose of conducting the election of a board before the expiry of the term of the current board?
Answer: The purpose of conducting the election of a board before the expiry of the term of the current board is to ensure that the newly elected members of the board assume office immediately on the expiry of the office of members of the outgoing board.

Question: What are the conditions under which a board may be superseded or kept under suspension?
Answer: The board may be superseded or kept under suspension in case of its persistent default; negligence in the performance of its duties; the board has committed any act prejudicial to the interests of the co-operative society or its members; there is stalemate in the constitution or functions of the board; or the authority or body as provided by the Legislature of a State, by law, under clause (2) of Article 243-ZK, has failed to conduct elections in accordance with the provisions of the State Act.

Question: What could cause the persistent default, negligence in duties, committing acts prejudicial to the interests of the co-operative society or its members, stalemate in the constitution or functions of the board, or failure to conduct elections in accordance with the provisions of the State Act under clause (2) of Article 243-ZK by the authority or body as provided by the Legislature of a State?
Answer: These could lead to the board being superseded or kept under suspension.

Question: Under what conditions can the board of a co-operative society not be superseded or kept under suspension?
Answer: The board of any such co-operative society shall not be superseded or kept under suspension where there is no Government shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee by the Government.

Question: What prevents the board of a co-operative society from being superseded or kept under suspension?
Answer: The board of a co-operative society cannot be superseded or kept under suspension if there is no Government shareholding, loan, financial assistance, or any form of guarantee by the Government.

Question: What provisions apply in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of banking?
Answer: In case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of banking, the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) shall also apply.

Question: What law is applicable to a co-operative society conducting banking business?
Answer: The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) is applicable to a co-operative society conducting banking business.

Question: What happens in case of supersession of a board?
Answer: In case of supersession of a board, the administrator appointed to manage the affairs of such co-operative society shall arrange for conduct of elections within the period specified in clause (1) and handover the management to be elected board.

Question: Who arranges for the conduct of elections and hands over the management to the elected board when a board is superseded?
Answer: The administrator appointed to manage the affairs of such co-operative society arranges for the conduct of elections and hands over the management when a board is superseded.

Question: Who can make provisions for the conditions of service of the administrator?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the conditions of service of the administrator.

Question: Who has the authority, by law, to define the conditions of service for an administrator?
Answer: The Legislature of a State

Question: Who is responsible for the auditing of co-operative society's accounts?
Answer: An auditor or auditing firms appointed by the general body of the co-operative society are responsible for the auditing of the co-operative society's accounts.

Question: Who appoints the auditor or auditing firms responsible for the auditing of the co-operative society's accounts?
Answer: The auditor or auditing firms are appointed by the general body of the co-operative society.

Question: Who determines the minimum qualifications and experience of auditors and auditing firms for co-operative societies?
Answer: The Legislature of a State lays down the minimum qualifications and experience of auditors and auditing firms.

Question: Who lays down the minimum qualifications and experience of auditors and auditing firms for co-operative societies?
Answer: The Legislature of a State determines the minimum qualifications and experience of auditors and auditing firms.

Question: When should the accounts of every co-operative society be audited?
Answer: The accounts of every co-operative society should be audited within six months of the close of the financial year to which such accounts relate.

Question: What should be done within six months of the close of the financial year for every co-operative society?
Answer: The accounts of every co-operative society should be audited.

Question: What is the timeline for the convening of the annual general body meeting of every co-operative society?
Answer: The annual general body meeting of every co-operative society should be convened within a period of six months of close of the financial year.

Question: Within what period should the annual general body meeting of every co-operative society be convened after the close of the financial year?
Answer: The annual general body meeting of every co-operative society should be convened within a period of six months of close of the financial year.

Question: What kind of access does a member of a co-operative society have according to the law?
Answer: A member of a co-operative society has access to the books, information and accounts of the co-operative society kept in regular transaction of its business with such member.

Question: What does a member of a co-operative society have access to in regular transaction of its business?
Answer: A member of a co-operative society has access to the books, information and accounts of the co-operative society.

Question: What provisions can the Legislature of a State make to ensure the participation of members in the management of the co-operative society?
Answer: The Legislature of a State can make provisions to ensure the participation of members in the management of the co-operative society providing minimum requirement of attending meetings by the members and utilising the minimum level of services.

Question: What provisions can a State Legislature make to ensure member participation in co-operative society management?
Answer: A State Legislature can ensure member participation in co-operative society management by stipulating a minimum requirement for meeting attendance and service utilization.

Question: What kind of education can the Legislature of a State provide for its members?
Answer: The Legislature of a State can provide for co-operative education and training for its members.

Question: Who can provide co-operative education and training for its members?
Answer: The Legislature of a State can provide co-operative education and training for its members.

Question: When should every co-operative society file returns?
Answer: Within six months of the close of every financial year.

Question: What is the deadline for a co-operative society to file returns after the close of a financial year?
Answer: Within six months

Question: What should the return of a co-operative society include?
Answer: Annual report of its activities, its audited statement of accounts, plan for surplus disposal, list of amendments to the bye-laws, declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting and conduct of elections when due, and any other information required by the Registrar.

Question: What does the annual report of a co-operative society, its audited statement of accounts, plan for surplus disposal, list of amendments to the bye-laws, declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting and conduct of elections when due, and any other information required by the Registrar refer to?
Answer: These refer to the return of a co-operative society.

Question: Who can make provisions for the offences relating to the co-operative societies and penalties for such offences?
Answer: The Legislature of a State.

Question: Who has the authority to make provisions for the offences relating to co-operative societies and penalties for such offences?
Answer: The Legislature of a State.

Question: What acts or omissions are considered as offences under the law made by the Legislature of a State?
Answer: Making a false return or furnishing false information, not furnishing any information required, disobeying any summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under the provisions of the State Act, failing to pay to a co-operative society amount deducted from its employee within a specified period, failing to handover custody of books, accounts, documents, records, cash, security and other property belonging to a co-operative society to an authorised person.

Question: What are the consequences of making a false return, not providing necessary information, disobeying summons or lawful orders, failing to pay a co-operative society within a specified time, or not handing over custody of books, accounts, and other properties to an authorised person?
Answer: These acts or omissions are considered as offences under the law made by the Legislature of a State.

Question: What does 243-ZR state about the application of provisions to multi-State co-operative societies?
Answer: 243-ZR states that the provisions of this Part apply to the multi-State co-operative societies, with the modification that any reference to 'Legislature of a State', 'State Act' or 'State Government' should be construed as a reference to 'Parliament', 'Central Act' or 'the Central Government' respectively.

Question: What does 243-ZR specify should be the interpretation of 'Legislature of a State', 'State Act' or 'State Government' in the context of multi-State co-operative societies?
Answer: 243-ZR specifies that in the context of multi-State co-operative societies, any reference to 'Legislature of a State', 'State Act' or 'State Government' should be construed as a reference to 'Parliament', 'Central Act' or 'the Central Government' respectively.

Question: What does 243-ZS state about the application to Union territories?
Answer: 243-ZS states that the provisions of this Part apply to the Union territories. In their application to a Union territory without a Legislative Assembly, references to the Legislature of a State should be a reference to the administrator thereof appointed under Article 239. In relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, it is to that Legislative Assembly. However, the President may direct that the provisions of this Part shall not apply to any Union territory or Part thereof as specified in a notification in the Official Gazette.

Question: What does 243-ZS specify in regards to its application to Union territories without a Legislative Assembly, Union territories with a Legislative Assembly, and the President's power to exempt certain Union territories?
Answer: 243-ZS states that the provisions of this Part apply to the Union territories. In their application to a Union territory without a Legislative Assembly, references to the Legislature of a State should be a reference to the administrator thereof appointed under Article 239. In relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, it is to that Legislative Assembly. However, the President may direct that the provisions of this Part shall not apply to any Union territory or Part thereof as specified in a notification in the Official Gazette.

Question: What does 243-ZT state about the continuance of existing laws?
Answer: 243-ZT states that any provision of any law relating to co-operative societies in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is less.

Question: What does 243-ZT specify about the duration and conditions under which a law relating to co-operative societies can remain in force after the commencement of the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011?
Answer: 243-ZT states that any provision of any law relating to co-operative societies in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is less.

Question: What does Article 244 state about the administration of Scheduled Areas and tribal areas?
Answer: Article 244 states that the provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the administration and control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State other than the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the administration of the tribal areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.

Question: Which Schedule applies to the administration and control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State other than the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram according to Article 244? And which Schedule applies to the administration of the tribal areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram?
Answer: According to Article 244, the provisions of the Fifth Schedule apply to the administration and control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State other than the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. The provisions of the Sixth Schedule apply to the administration of the tribal areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.

Question: What can the Parliament form within the State of Assam according to the constitution?
Answer: An autonomous State comprising all or any of the tribal areas specified in Part I of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule.

Question: Which part of the constitution specifies that an autonomous state can be formed in Assam, comprising all or any of the tribal areas?
Answer: Part I of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule.

Question: What can be created for the autonomous State?
Answer: A body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to function as a Legislature for the autonomous State, or a Council of Ministers, or both.

Question: What is the function of a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, in the autonomous State?
Answer: The body can function as a Legislature for the autonomous State, a Council of Ministers, or both.

Question: What matters can the law specify in relation to the autonomous State?
Answer: The matters enumerated in the State List or the Concurrent List with respect to which the Legislature of the autonomous State shall have power to make laws, the matters with respect to which the executive power of the autonomous State shall extend, any tax levied by the State of Assam that should be assigned to the autonomous State, any reference to a State in the constitution should include the autonomous State, and make any necessary supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions.

Question: What does the State List or the Concurrent List enumerate, what does the executive power of the autonomous State extend to, what tax is levied by the State of Assam that should be assigned to the autonomous State, what does any reference to a State in the constitution include, and what kind of provisions should be made?
Answer: The law specifies these matters in relation to the autonomous State. The State List or the Concurrent List enumerates the matters to which the Legislature of the autonomous State has the power to make laws. The executive power of the autonomous State extends to these matters. The tax that should be assigned to the autonomous State is the one levied by the State of Assam. Any reference to a State in the constitution includes the autonomous State, and any necessary supplemental, incidental, and consequential provisions should be made.

Question: What is required for an amendment of any such law to have effect?
Answer: The amendment must be passed in each House of Parliament by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting.

Question: What is the procedure for an amendment to pass in each House of Parliament?
Answer: The amendment must be passed by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting.

Question: Is such a law considered an amendment of the constitution?
Answer: No, it shall not be deemed to be an amendment of the constitution.

Question: Can a law be deemed as an amendment of the constitution?
Answer: No, it shall not be deemed to be an amendment of the constitution.

Question: What is the purpose of Article 368?
Answer: Article 368 provides the process to amend the Constitution.

Question: Which article provides the process to amend the Constitution?
Answer: Article 368

Question: What is the extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States according to Article 245?
Answer: According to Article 245, Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State.

Question: Which article states that the Parliament can make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State?
Answer: This is stated in Article 245.

Question: What is the subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States according to Article 246?
Answer: According to Article 246, Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List. Both Parliament and the Legislature of any State have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List. The Legislature of any State has exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List.

Question: Which entity has the exclusive power to make laws with respect to the matters enumerated in the Union List, and who has the power to make laws with respect to the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List and State List according to Article 246?
Answer: According to Article 246, Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List. Both Parliament and the Legislature of any State have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List. The Legislature of any State has exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List.

Question: What power does Parliament have under Article 246A?
Answer: Under Article 246A, Parliament and the Legislature of every State have power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by such State.

Question: Which article gives Parliament and the Legislature of every State the power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by such State?
Answer: Article 246A gives Parliament and the Legislature of every State this power.

Question: Who has the exclusive power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax where the supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Which body has the power to make laws regarding the goods and services tax in the context of inter-State trade or commerce?
Answer: Parliament

Question: When do the provisions of this article, in respect of goods and services tax referred to in clause (5) of article 279A, take effect?
Answer: From the date recommended by the Goods and Services Tax Council

Question: What determines the date when the provisions of this article, in respect of goods and services tax referred to in clause (5) of article 279A, take effect?
Answer: The date recommended by the Goods and Services Tax Council

Question: What can Parliament provide for, notwithstanding anything in this Chapter?
Answer: The establishment of any additional courts for the better administration of laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with respect to a matter enumerated in the Union List

Question: What does the establishment of any additional courts for the better administration of laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with respect to a matter enumerated in the Union List refer to?
Answer: It refers to what Parliament can provide for, notwithstanding anything in this Chapter.

Question: What is the Parliament's power according to article 248?
Answer: Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List, including the power of making any law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of those Lists

Question: Which body has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List, and can impose a tax not mentioned in either of those Lists, according to the constitution?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Under what conditions can the Parliament legislate with respect to goods and services tax provided under article 246A or a matter in the State List in the national interest?
Answer: If the Council of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament should make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the State List specified in the resolution

Question: What is the necessary procedure for the Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the State List specified in the resolution?
Answer: The Council of States has to declare by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest.

Question: For how long does a resolution passed under clause (1) remain in force?
Answer: For such period not exceeding one year as may be specified therein

Question: What is the maximum duration that a resolution under clause (1) can remain in force if specified?
Answer: One year

Question: What happens to a resolution passed in the manner provided in clause (1)?
Answer: Such resolution shall continue in force for a further period of one year from the date on which under this clause it would otherwise have ceased to be in force.

Question: How long will a resolution passed in the manner provided in clause (1) continue in force from the date on which it would otherwise have ceased to be in force?
Answer: Such resolution shall continue in force for a further period of one year.

Question: What happens to a law made by Parliament under clause (1) after the resolution has ceased to be in force?
Answer: It shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of six months after the resolution has ceased to be in force, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.

Question: What is the duration for a law made by Parliament under clause (1) to cease to have effect after the resolution has ceased to be in force and what are the exceptions to it?
Answer: The law shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of six months after the resolution has ceased to be in force, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.

Question: What power does Parliament have during a Proclamation of Emergency according to article 250?
Answer: Parliament shall, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List.

Question: What authority is granted to Parliament in regards to making laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List during a Proclamation of Emergency?
Answer: According to article 250, during a Proclamation of Emergency, Parliament has the power to make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India.

Question: What happens to a law made by Parliament during a Proclamation of Emergency after it has ceased to operate?
Answer: It shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.

Question: When does a law made by Parliament during a Proclamation of Emergency cease to have effect after the Proclamation has ceased to operate?
Answer: It ceases to have effect on the expiration of a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.

Question: What is stated in article 251 regarding the inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and the Legislatures of States?
Answer: Nothing in articles 249 and 250 shall restrict the power of the Legislature of a State to make any law which under this Constitution it has power to make, but if any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament has under either of the said articles power to make, the law made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of a State, shall prevail.

Question: What happens if a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to a law made by Parliament under either of articles 249 and 250?
Answer: If a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to a law made by Parliament, which Parliament has under either of the articles 249 and 250 the power to make, the law made by Parliament shall prevail, regardless of whether it was passed before or after the law made by the State Legislature. This is stated in article 251.

Question: What happens when a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to a law made by Parliament?
Answer: The law made by Parliament shall prevail, and the law made by the Legislature of the State shall be inoperative to the extent of the repugnancy, but only as long as the law made by Parliament continues to have effect.

Question: What is the effect of a law made by Parliament on a conflicting law made by the Legislature of a State?
Answer: If a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to a law made by Parliament, the law made by Parliament shall prevail, and the law made by the State Legislature will be inoperative to the extent of the repugnancy. However, this applies only as long as the law made by Parliament is in effect.

Question: What is the power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State?
Answer: If it appears desirable to the Legislatures of two or more States that any matter should be regulated by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of those States, Parliament can pass an act for regulating that matter. Any Act so passed shall apply to such States and to any other State which adopts it afterwards by resolution passed by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each of the Houses of the Legislature of that State.

Question: How can Parliament pass an act that regulates a matter for two or more States and how can other States adopt this act?
Answer: If it appears desirable to the Legislatures of two or more States that any matter should be regulated by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of those States, Parliament can pass an act for regulating that matter. Any Act so passed shall apply to such States and to any other State which adopts it afterwards by resolution passed by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each of the Houses of the Legislature of that State.

Question: Can an Act passed by Parliament be amended or repealed by an Act of the Legislature of that State?
Answer: No, any Act passed by Parliament can be amended or repealed by an Act of Parliament passed or adopted in like manner but shall not, as respects any State to which it applies, be amended or repealed by an Act of the Legislature of that State.

Question: Who has the authority to amend or repeal an Act passed by Parliament?
Answer: Any Act passed by Parliament can be amended or repealed by an Act of Parliament passed or adopted in like manner, not by an Act of the Legislature of any State.

Question: Does Parliament have the power to make any law for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country?
Answer: Yes, Parliament has the power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or any decision made at any international conference, association or other body.

Question: Who has the power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or any decision made at any international conference, association or other body?
Answer: Parliament has the power to make any law for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country.

Question: What happens in case of inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States?
Answer: If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, the law made by Parliament shall prevail and the law made by the State Legislature shall, to the extent of repugnancy, be void.

Question: Which law prevails when there is a contradiction between a law made by Parliament and a law made by the Legislature of a State, and what happens to the contradicting state law?
Answer: If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, the law made by Parliament shall prevail and the law made by the State Legislature shall, to the extent of repugnancy, be void.

Question: What happens when a state law conflicts with a law made by Parliament or an existing law, according to the Concurrent List?
Answer: The law made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the state, shall prevail and the state law shall be void to the extent of the repugnancy.

Question: Which law prevails when there is a conflict between a state law and a law made by Parliament, and what happens to the state law?
Answer: The law made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the state, shall prevail and the state law shall be void to the extent of the repugnancy.

Question: What occurs if a law made by the Legislature of a State repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law by Parliament or an existing law has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent?
Answer: The law so made by the Legislature of such State shall prevail in that State.

Question: What happens when a law made by the Legislature of a State, which contradicts an earlier law by Parliament or an existing law, receives the President's assent after being reserved for his consideration?
Answer: The law so made by the Legislature of such State shall prevail in that State.

Question: Can Parliament make any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of the State?
Answer: Yes, Parliament can enact at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of the State.

Question: Is it possible for Parliament to enact at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of the State?
Answer: Yes, Parliament can make any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of the State.

Question: What are the requirements for an Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State to be regarded as valid, even if some recommendation or previous sanction required by the Constitution was not given?
Answer: The Act will be valid if assent to that Act was given by the Governor or the President, depending on who the recommendation required was from.

Question: In the absence of some recommendation or previous sanction required by the Constitution, under what circumstances can an Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State be regarded as valid?
Answer: The Act can be regarded as valid if assent to that Act was given by the Governor or the President, depending on who the recommendation required was from.

Question: What is the obligation of States and the Union according to Section 256?
Answer: The executive power of every State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by Parliament and any existing laws.

Question: How should the executive power of every State be exercised according to the laws made by Parliament and any existing laws?
Answer: According to Section 256, the executive power of every State should be exercised so as to ensure compliance with the laws made by Parliament and any existing laws.

Question: What is the main provision of Article 257 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The executive power of every State shall be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the Union has the power to give directions to a State as may appear to the Government of India to be necessary.

Question: Which article of the Indian Constitution states that the executive power of every State should not impede the exercise of the Union's executive power, and that the Union can give directions to a State as necessary?
Answer: Article 257 of the Indian Constitution

Question: What power does the Union have regarding the construction and maintenance of means of communication?
Answer: The executive power of the Union extends to the giving of directions to a State as to the construction and maintenance of means of communication declared in the direction to be of national or military importance.

Question: To what extent does the executive power of the Union reach in terms of giving directions to a State for the construction and maintenance of means of communication of national or military importance?
Answer: The executive power of the Union extends to the giving of directions to a State as to the construction and maintenance of means of communication declared in the direction to be of national or military importance.

Question: What is the Union's power in relation to the protection of railways within a State?
Answer: The executive power of the Union extends to the giving of directions to a State as to the measures to be taken for the protection of the railways within the State.

Question: What does the executive power of the Union extend to in regards to the protection of the railways within a State?
Answer: The executive power of the Union extends to the giving of directions to a State as to the measures to be taken for the protection of the railways within the State.

Question: What happens if costs are incurred in excess while carrying out a direction given to a State?
Answer: If costs have been incurred in excess of those which would have been incurred in the discharge of the normal duties of the State, there shall be paid by the Government of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India.

Question: Who pays the state if costs have been incurred in excess of those which would have been incurred in the discharge of the normal duties of the State, and how is the sum determined?
Answer: The Government of India shall pay the State such sum as may be agreed. If there is no agreement, it will be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India.

Question: What does the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979) repeal?
Answer: The Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979) repeals the Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other forces of the Union.

Question: What is repealed by The Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979)?
Answer: The Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other forces of the Union is repealed by The Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

Question: What power does the President have according to article 258 of the Constitution of India?
Answer: According to article 258 of the Constitution of India, the President may, with the consent of the Government of a State, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the Union extends.

Question: What is the function of the Government of a State according to article 258 of the Constitution of India, assuming the President has given consent?
Answer: According to article 258 of the Constitution of India, if the President gives consent, the Government of a State or its officers can be entrusted with functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, either conditionally or unconditionally.

Question: What happens when powers and duties have been conferred or imposed upon a State or officers or authorities thereof under article 258?
Answer: Under article 258, if powers and duties have been conferred or imposed upon a State or officers or authorities thereof, the Government of India shall pay the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred by the State in connection with the exercise of those powers and duties.

Question: What happens in terms of financial compensation when the Government of India confers or imposes powers and duties upon a State, its officers, or authorities under Article 258?
Answer: The Government of India shall pay the State such sum as may be agreed upon, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred by the State in connection with the exercise of those powers and duties.

Question: What power does the Governor of a State have according to article 258A?
Answer: According to article 258A, the Governor of a State may, with the consent of the Government of India, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the State extends.

Question: Which article allows the Governor of a State to entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to the Government of India or to its officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the State extends, with the consent of the Government of India?
Answer: Article 258A allows the Governor of a State to entrust these functions.

Question: What does the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. repeal?
Answer: The Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. repeals the Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule.

Question: What is repealed by the Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule?
Answer: The Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

Question: What jurisdiction does the Union have in relation to territories outside India according to article 260?
Answer: According to article 260, the Government of the Union has jurisdiction in relation to territories outside India.

Question: Which article states that the Government of the Union has jurisdiction in relation to territories outside India?
Answer: Article 260 states that the Government of the Union has jurisdiction in relation to territories outside India.

Question: What can the government of India undertake with the agreement of any territory not part of India?
Answer: The government of India can undertake any executive, legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory.

Question: What functions can the government of India undertake in a territory not part of India, with their agreement?
Answer: The government of India can undertake any executive, legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory.

Question: What is given full faith and credit throughout the territory of India?
Answer: Public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State are given full faith and credit throughout the territory of India.

Question: What are public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State given throughout the territory of India?
Answer: Public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State are given full faith and credit throughout the territory of India.

Question: What is the capability of final judgments or orders delivered by civil courts in any part of the territory of India?
Answer: Final judgments or orders delivered by civil courts in any part of the territory of India shall be capable of execution anywhere within that territory according to law.

Question: Where can final judgments or orders delivered by civil courts in any part of the territory of India be executed?
Answer: Final judgments or orders delivered by civil courts in any part of the territory of India can be executed anywhere within that territory according to law.

Question: What provision may the Parliament make with respect to disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river valleys?
Answer: Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.

Question: What can the Parliament do by law in terms of adjudication of any dispute or complaint concerning the use, distribution, or control of the waters of any inter-State river or river valley?
Answer: With respect to disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river valleys, the Parliament may make provisions by law for their adjudication.

Question: What restriction can Parliament place on the Supreme Court or any other court with respect to certain disputes?
Answer: Parliament may by law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to in clause (1).

Question: What provision can be made by Parliament to prevent the Supreme Court or any other court from exercising jurisdiction in respect of certain disputes or complaints?
Answer: Parliament may by law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to in clause (1).

Question: What is the duty of the Council established if it appears to the President that the public interests would be served?
Answer: The Council is charged with the duty of inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have arisen between States; and investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of the States, or the Union and one or more of the States, have a common interest.

Question: What are the responsibilities of the Council when disputes arise between States or when subjects of common interest between some or all States and the Union come up?
Answer: The Council is charged with the duty of inquiring into and advising upon such disputes and investigating and discussing such subjects, especially if it appears to the President that the public interests would be served by its establishment.

Question: What does the 'Finance Commission' refer to in this document?
Answer: A Finance Commission constituted under article 280.

Question: Under which article is the 'Finance Commission' constituted as mentioned in this document?
Answer: Article 280

Question: Under what conditions can a tax be levied or collected according to this text?
Answer: A tax can be levied or collected only by the authority of law.

Question: Who has the authority to levy or collect a tax according to this text?
Answer: Only the authority of law can levy or collect a tax.

Question: What forms the 'Consolidated Fund of India' according to this document?
Answer: All revenues received by the Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans.

Question: What does the Government of India include in the 'Consolidated Fund of India'?
Answer: All revenues received by the Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans.

Question: What forms the 'Consolidated Fund of the State' according to this document?
Answer: All revenues received by the Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans.

Question: What does 'All revenues received by the Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans' constitute according to this document?
Answer: It forms the 'Consolidated Fund of the State'.

Question: Where should all other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government of India or the Government of a State be credited?
Answer: They should be credited to the public account of India or the public account of the State, as the case may be.

Question: Where should the public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government of India or the Government of a State be credited?
Answer: They should be credited to the public account of India or the public account of the State, depending on whether the money was received on behalf of the Government of India or the Government of a State.

Question: Under what conditions can moneys be appropriated from the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State?
Answer: No moneys can be appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.

Question: What is required for moneys to be appropriated from the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State?
Answer: No moneys can be appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.

Question: What is the purpose of the Contingency Fund of India?
Answer: The Contingency Fund of India is established to enable advances to be made by the President for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by Parliament.

Question: Who is enabled to make advances for meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation by Parliament through the Contingency Fund of India?
Answer: The President is enabled to make advances for meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation by Parliament through the Contingency Fund of India.

Question: Who has the disposal of the Contingency Fund of the State?
Answer: The Contingency Fund of the State is placed at the disposal of the Governor of the State.

Question: Who is the Contingency Fund of the State placed at the disposal of?
Answer: The Contingency Fund of the State is placed at the disposal of the Governor of the State.

Question: What is the purpose of the Contingency Fund of the State?
Answer: The Contingency Fund of the State is established to enable advances to be made by the Governor for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State.

Question: Who is enabled to make advances for meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation by the Legislature from the Contingency Fund of the State?
Answer: The Governor is enabled to make advances for meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation by the Legislature from the Contingency Fund of the State.

Question: Who collects stamp duties levied by the Government of India?
Answer: Stamp duties levied by the Government of India are collected by the Government of India within any Union territory, and by the States within which such duties are respectively leviable.

Question: Who collects stamp duties within any Union territory and within the States where such duties are leviable in India?
Answer: Stamp duties levied by the Government of India are collected by the Government of India within any Union territory, and by the States within which such duties are respectively leviable.

Question: Do the proceeds of any such duty leviable within any State form part of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: No, the proceeds in any financial year of any such duty leviable within any State shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to that State.

Question: Where are the proceeds in any financial year of any such duty leviable within any State assigned to?
Answer: The proceeds in any financial year of any such duty leviable within any State are assigned to that State, not the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: Who levies and collects taxes on the sale or purchase of goods and taxes on the consignment of goods?
Answer: Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods and taxes on the consignment of goods are levied and collected by the Government of India.

Question: Who is responsible for levying and collecting taxes on the sale or purchase and consignment of goods in India?
Answer: The Government of India is responsible for levying and collecting taxes on the sale or purchase and consignment of goods.

Question: To whom are these taxes assigned?
Answer: These taxes are assigned and shall be deemed to have been assigned to the States.

Question: Who are the taxes deemed to have been assigned to?
Answer: The taxes are deemed to have been assigned to the States.

Question: What does the expression 'taxes on the sale or purchase of goods' mean?
Answer: Taxes on sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.

Question: What does the phrase 'sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce' apply to, excluding newspapers?
Answer: This phrase applies to the taxes on the sale or purchase of goods.

Question: What does the expression 'taxes on the consignment of goods' mean?
Answer: Taxes on the consignment of goods (whether the consignment is to the person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.

Question: When does the term 'taxes on the consignment of goods' apply?
Answer: The term 'taxes on the consignment of goods' applies when such consignment takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, whether the consignment is to the person making it or to any other person.

Question: What happens to the net proceeds of any such tax in a financial year?
Answer: They do not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be formulated by Parliament by law.

Question: Where do the net proceeds of any such tax in a financial year go and how are they distributed?
Answer: They do not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be formulated by Parliament by law.

Question: Who can formulate principles for determining when a sale or purchase of, or consignment of, goods takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce?
Answer: Parliament may by law formulate these principles.

Question: Who has the authority to formulate laws for determining when a sale or purchase of, or consignment of, goods takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce?
Answer: Parliament has the authority to formulate these principles.

Question: Who levies and collects the goods and services tax on supplies in the course of inter-State trade or commerce?
Answer: The Government of India.

Question: Which entity is responsible for levying and collecting the goods and services tax on supplies in the course of inter-State trade or commerce?
Answer: The Government of India

Question: What happens to the amount apportioned to a State under clause (1)?
Answer: It shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: Does the amount apportioned to a State under clause (1) form part of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: No, it does not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: What happens to the tax levied by a State under article 246A?
Answer: The tax levied by a State under article 246A, if used for payment of the tax, shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of the State.

Question: Does the tax levied by a State under article 246A form part of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of the State if used for payment of the tax?
Answer: No, the tax levied by a State under article 246A, if used for payment of the tax, does not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of the State.

Question: What is the role of the Parliament regarding the principles for determining the place of supply?
Answer: Parliament may, by law, formulate the principles for determining the place of supply, and when a supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.

Question: Who has the authority to formulate the principles for determining the place of supply, particularly in the context of inter-State trade or commerce?
Answer: The Parliament has the authority to formulate the principles for determining the place of supply in the context of inter-State trade or commerce.

Question: What happens to the taxes and duties referred to in the Union List?
Answer: All taxes and duties referred to in the Union List, except those specified, shall be levied and collected by the Government of India and shall be distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2).

Question: Who levies and collects all taxes and duties referred to in the Union List, and how are they distributed?
Answer: All taxes and duties referred to in the Union List, except those specified, are levied and collected by the Government of India and are distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2).

Question: How is the tax collected by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A distributed?
Answer: The tax collected by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A shall also be distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2).

Question: How is the tax collected under clause (1) of article 246A, which is gathered by the Union, distributed between the Union and the States?
Answer: The tax is distributed in the manner provided in clause (2) of the same article.

Question: What happens to the tax levied and collected by the Union under clause (2) of article 246A and article 269A?
Answer: The tax levied and collected by the Union under clause (2) of article 246A and article 269A, which has been used for payment of the tax levied by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A, and the amount apportioned to the Union under clause (1) of article 269A, shall also be distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2).

Question: What is the distribution of the tax levied and collected by the Union under clause (2) of article 246A and article 269A, that has been used for payment of the tax levied by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A, and the amount apportioned to the Union under clause (1) of article 269A?
Answer: The tax and the apportioned amount shall be distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2).

Question: What does 'prescribed' mean in this article?
Answer: In this article, 'prescribed' typically refers to a rule or guideline that has been officially put forth or stipulated.

Question: What is the meaning of 'prescribed' when it refers to a rule or guideline that has been officially put forth or stipulated in an article?
Answer: In this context, 'prescribed' typically means that the rule or guideline has been officially put forth or stipulated.

Question: Who can prescribe an order before and after a Finance Commission has been constituted?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to prescribe an order before and after a Finance Commission has been constituted?
Answer: The President

Question: Can Parliament increase any of the duties or taxes referred to in articles 269 and 270?
Answer: Yes, Parliament may at any time increase any of the duties or taxes referred to in those articles except the goods and services tax.

Question: Can Parliament increase the goods and services tax referred to in articles 269 and 270?
Answer: No, Parliament cannot increase the goods and services tax, but they may increase any other duties or taxes referred to in those articles.

Question: What happens to the whole proceeds of any such surcharge?
Answer: The whole proceeds of any such surcharge shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: What does the whole proceeds of any such surcharge form part of?
Answer: The whole proceeds of any such surcharge form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: What is charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of certain states?
Answer: There shall be charged sums as may be prescribed in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of export duty on jute and jute products.

Question: What is prescribed to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of export duty on jute and jute products?
Answer: Grants-in-aid of the revenues of certain states are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India each year.

Question: How long will the sums continue to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The sums will continue to be charged so long as any export duty on jute or jute products continues to be levied by the Government of India or until the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution whichever is earlier.

Question: Until when will the sums continue to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India if any export duty on jute or jute products continues to be levied by the Government of India?
Answer: The sums will continue to be charged until the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution whichever is earlier.

Question: What is required for Bills affecting taxation in which States are interested?
Answer: Prior recommendation of President is required.

Question: What is required for a bill affecting taxation to be considered, especially when states are interested?
Answer: Prior recommendation of President is required.

Question: In what circumstances can a bill affecting the principles of money distribution to States be introduced in the Parliament?
Answer: A bill that affects the principles on which money is distributable to States can be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament only on the recommendation of the President.

Question: Who needs to recommend a bill for it to be introduced in either House of Parliament if it affects the principles on which money is distributable to States?
Answer: The President needs to recommend such a bill.

Question: What does the expression “tax or duty in which States are interested” mean according to this article?
Answer: The expression “tax or duty in which States are interested” means either a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are assigned to any State, or a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums are for the time being payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any State.

Question: What could be the potential meanings of a 'tax or duty in which States are interested' if it refers to a tax or duty where the net proceeds are either assigned to any State or sums are payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any State?
Answer: The expression “tax or duty in which States are interested” means either a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are assigned to any State, or a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums are for the time being payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any State.

Question: What sums are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India each year?
Answer: Sums that Parliament may by law provide are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance.

Question: What determines the sums charged on the Consolidated Fund of India each year and how is it allocated?
Answer: The sums charged on the Consolidated Fund of India each year are determined by what the Parliament may by law provide. These sums are allocated as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance.

Question: What is the purpose of the grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India are meant to enable that State to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State.

Question: What are the grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India meant for?
Answer: The grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India are meant to enable that State to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State.

Question: What specific provisions are made for the State of Assam?
Answer: There shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and recurring, equivalent to the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the two years immediately preceding the commencement of this Constitution in respect of the administration of the tribal areas specified in Part I of the table appended.

Question: What is the purpose of the funds paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India to the State of Assam?
Answer: The funds paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India to the State of Assam are intended as grants-in-aid of the revenues, capital and recurring, equivalent to the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the two years immediately preceding the commencement of this Constitution in respect of the administration of the tribal areas specified in Part I of the table appended.

Question: Who approves the schemes of development undertaken by the State for raising the level of administration?
Answer: The Government of India

Question: What entity is responsible for approving the schemes of development undertaken by the State for raising the level of administration?
Answer: The Government of India

Question: To whom shall the sums payable under clause (a) of the second proviso to clause (1) be paid if the autonomous State comprises all the tribal areas?
Answer: The autonomous State

Question: Who will receive the sums payable under clause (a) of the second proviso to clause (1) if it comprises all the tribal areas?
Answer: The autonomous State

Question: If the autonomous State comprises only some of the tribal areas, how will the sums payable be apportioned?
Answer: Between the State of Assam and the autonomous State as the President may, by order, specify

Question: Who decides how the sums payable will be apportioned between the State of Assam and the autonomous State if the autonomous State comprises only some of the tribal areas?
Answer: The President, by order, specifies this

Question: What shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the autonomous State?
Answer: Sums, capital and recurring, equivalent to the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the autonomous State with the approval of the Government of India

Question: What are the sums, capital and recurring, equivalent to the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the autonomous State with the approval of the Government of India paid out of?
Answer: The Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the autonomous State

Question: Who has the power to make orders until provision is made by Parliament under clause (1)?
Answer: The President

Question: Who can make orders until provision is made by Parliament under clause (1)?
Answer: The President

Question: After a Finance Commission has been constituted, when can the President make an order under this clause?
Answer: After considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission

Question: What does the President consider before making an order under the clause after a Finance Commission has been constituted?
Answer: The President considers the recommendations of the Finance Commission

Question: What does article 276 relate to?
Answer: Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments

Question: Which article relates to taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments?
Answer: Article 276

Question: Who can pass a law relating to taxes for the benefit of the State or of a municipality, district board, local board or other local authority?
Answer: The Legislature of a State

Question: What is the role of the Legislature of a State in relation to taxes for the benefit of the State or of a municipality, district board, local board or other local authority?
Answer: They can pass a law relating to taxes

Question: What is the maximum amount payable in respect of any one person to the State or to any one municipality, district board, local board or other local authority in the State by way of taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments?
Answer: Two thousand and five hundred rupees per annum.

Question: What is the annual tax limit that can be paid by any one person to the State or to any one municipality, district board, local board or other local authority in the State on professions, trades, callings and employments?
Answer: Two thousand and five hundred rupees

Question: Does the power of the Legislature of a State to make laws regarding taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments limit the power of Parliament to make laws with respect to taxes on income accruing from or arising out of these professions, trades, callings and employments?
Answer: No, it does not limit the power of Parliament in any way.

Question: Does the power of the Legislature of a State to make laws regarding taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments limit the power of Parliament in any way?
Answer: No, it does not limit the power of Parliament in any way.

Question: What can continue to be levied and applied to the same purposes despite being mentioned in the Union List?
Answer: Any taxes, duties, cesses or fees which were being lawfully levied by the Government of any State or by any municipality or other local authority or body for the purposes of the State, municipality, district or other local area before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: Before the commencement of the constitution, who was lawfully levying taxes, duties, cesses or fees for the purposes of the State, municipality, district or other local area?
Answer: The Government of any State or any municipality or other local authority or body

Question: What is the meaning of 'net proceeds' in the context of tax or duty?
Answer: Net proceeds in relation to any tax or duty means the proceeds thereof reduced by the cost of collection.

Question: What is reduced by the cost of collection in relation to any tax or duty?
Answer: The net proceeds are reduced by the cost of collection in relation to any tax or duty.

Question: Who is responsible for ascertaining and certifying the net proceeds of any tax or duty, or of any part of any tax or duty, in or attributable to any area?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

Question: What is the role of The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India in relation to taxes and duties?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India is responsible for ascertaining and certifying the net proceeds of any tax or duty, or of any part of any tax or duty, in or attributable to any area.

Question: Who is responsible for providing the manner in which the proceeds of any duty or tax are calculated?
Answer: The President

Question: What role is responsible for providing the manner in which the proceeds of any duty or tax are calculated?
Answer: The President

Question: What is the President required to constitute within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016?
Answer: The Goods and Services Tax Council

Question: What was constituted by the President within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016?
Answer: The Goods and Services Tax Council

Question: Who are the members of the Goods and Services Tax Council?
Answer: The Union Finance Minister (Chairperson), the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue or Finance (Member), and the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other Minister nominated by each State Government (Members)

Question: Who holds the positions of Chairperson and Member in the Goods and Services Tax Council?
Answer: The Union Finance Minister holds the position of Chairperson and the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue or Finance and the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other Minister nominated by each State Government hold the positions of Members.

Question: Who chooses the Vice-Chairperson of the Goods and Services Tax Council?
Answer: The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred to in sub-clause (c) of clause (2)

Question: Who are referred to in sub-clause (c) of clause (2) of the Goods and Services Tax Council?
Answer: The Members who choose the Vice-Chairperson of the Goods and Services Tax Council

Question: What is one of the responsibilities of the Goods and Services Tax Council?
Answer: To make recommendations to the Union and the States on various aspects related to the goods and services tax

Question: Who is responsible for making recommendations to the Union and the States on various aspects related to the goods and services tax?
Answer: The Goods and Services Tax Council

Question: What is the Goods and Services Tax Council responsible for?
Answer: The Goods and Services Tax Council is responsible for deciding matters related to the goods and services tax, including the date on which the tax will be levied on certain items such as petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit, natural gas and aviation turbine fuel. The Council is guided by the need for a harmonised structure of goods and services tax and the development of a harmonised national market for goods and services.

Question: What does the Goods and Services Tax Council decide and what is it guided by?
Answer: The Goods and Services Tax Council decides on matters related to the goods and services tax, including the date on which the tax will be levied on certain items such as petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit, natural gas and aviation turbine fuel. It is guided by the need for a harmonised structure of goods and services tax and the development of a harmonised national market for goods and services.

Question: What constitutes a quorum at the Goods and Services Tax Council meetings?
Answer: One-half of the total number of Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council constitutes the quorum at its meetings.

Question: What is the number of members that constitutes a quorum at the Goods and Services Tax Council meetings?
Answer: One-half of the total number of Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council.

Question: How are decisions made at the Goods and Services Tax Council?
Answer: Every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council is taken at a meeting, by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the weighted votes of the members present and voting. The vote of the Central Government has a weightage of one-third of the total votes cast, while the votes of all the State Governments taken together have a weightage of two-thirds of the total votes cast.

Question: What is the required majority for a decision to be taken at a Goods and Services Tax Council meeting and how are the votes weighted between the Central Government and the State Governments?
Answer: A decision at a Goods and Services Tax Council meeting is taken by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the weighted votes of the members present and voting. The Central Government's vote has a weightage of one-third of the total votes cast, while the votes of all the State Governments taken together have a weightage of two-thirds of the total votes cast.

Question: What happens if there is a vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Goods and Services Tax Council?
Answer: No act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council is invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Council, any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Council, or any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the merits of the case.

Question: Is any act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council invalidated by any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Council, any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Council, or any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the merits of the case?
Answer: No, no act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council is invalid merely by reason of any of these issues.

Question: Who can adjudicate disputes between the Government of India and one or more States?
Answer: The Council

Question: Who adjudicates disputes between the Government of India and one or more States?
Answer: The Council

Question: Who can adjudicate disputes between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other side?
Answer: The Council

Question: Who is responsible for adjudicating disputes between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other side?
Answer: The Council

Question: Who can adjudicate disputes between two or more States?
Answer: The Council

Question: What is the role of The Council in the event of disputes between two or more States?
Answer: The Council can adjudicate disputes between two or more States.

Question: Who constitutes the Finance Commission?
Answer: The President

Question: Who forms the Finance Commission?
Answer: The President

Question: How frequently is the Finance Commission constituted?
Answer: Within two years from the commencement of the Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time as the President considers necessary

Question: When is the Finance Commission constituted after the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: Within two years from the commencement of the Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time as the President considers necessary

Question: Who determines the qualifications for appointment as members of the Finance Commission?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who is responsible for determining the qualifications for appointment as members of the Finance Commission?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What is the duty of the Finance Commission?
Answer: To make recommendations to the President on the distribution of taxes, principles governing grants-in-aid, measures to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State, and any other matter referred by the President in the interests of sound finance.

Question: What responsibilities does the Finance Commission have in relation to the President, distribution of taxes, grants-in-aid, and the Consolidated Fund of a State?
Answer: The Finance Commission's duty is to make recommendations to the President on the distribution of taxes, principles governing grants-in-aid, measures to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State, and any other matter referred by the President in the interests of sound finance.

Question: Who determines the procedure of the Finance Commission?
Answer: The Commission itself

Question: Who determines its own procedure in the Finance Commission?
Answer: The Commission itself

Question: Who provides the Commission with powers in the performance of their functions?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who does the Parliament provide powers to in the performance of their functions?
Answer: The Commission

Question: What action is to be taken by the President with regards to the recommendations of the Finance Commission?
Answer: The President shall cause every recommendation made by the Finance Commission under the provisions of this Constitution together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: What is the procedure for the President to follow regarding the recommendations made by the Finance Commission under the provisions of the Constitution?
Answer: The President shall cause every recommendation made by the Finance Commission under the provisions of this Constitution together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: Who can make grants for any public purpose according to section 282 of the constitution?
Answer: The Union or a State may make any grants for any public purpose.

Question: According to section 282 of the constitution, who may make grants for any public purpose?
Answer: The Union or a State

Question: What does section 283 of the constitution stipulate about the custody of the Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts?
Answer: The custody of the Consolidated Fund of India and the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of India, their payment into the public account of India and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by Parliament, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules made by the President.

Question: Who regulates the custody of the Consolidated Fund of India and the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of India, their payment into the public account of India and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to matters aforesaid until provision in that behalf is so made?
Answer: These matters are regulated by law made by Parliament, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, they are regulated by rules made by the President, as stipulated by section 283 of the constitution.

Question: What does section 283(2) of the constitution stipulate about the custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State and the Contingency Fund of a State?
Answer: The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State and the Contingency Fund of a State, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of the State, their payment into the public account of the State and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by the Legislature of the State, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules made by the Governor of the State.

Question: What does the law made by the Legislature of a State or the rules made by the Governor of the State regulate in terms of the custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State and the Contingency Fund of a State, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of the State, their payment into the public account of the State and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to matters aforesaid?
Answer: This is stipulated in section 283(2) of the constitution.

Question: What happens to moneys received by public servants and courts in India?
Answer: These moneys shall be paid into the public account of India or the public account of the State.

Question: Where are moneys received by public servants and courts in India paid into?
Answer: These moneys shall be paid into the public account of India or the public account of the State.

Question: What is the rule regarding taxation of the property of the Union in India?
Answer: The property of the Union is exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or by any authority within a State, unless Parliament provides otherwise by law.

Question: Is the property of the Union in India exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or any authority within the State, and under what condition could this change?
Answer: Yes, the property of the Union is exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or any authority within a State, unless Parliament provides otherwise by law.

Question: Can a State impose a tax on the supply of goods or services that takes place outside the State or during import/export?
Answer: No, a State cannot impose a tax on the supply of goods or services that takes place outside the State or during import/export.

Question: Is it permissible for a State to impose a tax on the supply of goods or services that are provided outside the State or during import/export?
Answer: No, it is not permissible for a State to impose such a tax.

Question: Are there any restrictions on the imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of goods in India?
Answer: Yes, no law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the supply of goods or services where such supply takes place outside the State or in the course of import or export of the goods or services.

Question: Can a state law in India impose a tax on the supply of goods or services when such supply takes place outside the State or during the import or export of the goods or services?
Answer: No, no law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the supply of goods or services where such supply takes place outside the State or in the course of import or export of the goods or services.

Question: What is the rule regarding taxation on the consumption or sale of electricity in India?
Answer: Unless otherwise provided by Parliament by law, no law of a State shall impose or authorise the imposition of a tax on the consumption or sale of electricity.

Question: Who has the authority to impose a tax on the consumption or sale of electricity in India?
Answer: Unless otherwise provided by Parliament by law, no law of a State shall impose or authorise the imposition of a tax on the consumption or sale of electricity.

Question: What is the law regarding the consumption of electricity by the Government of India?
Answer: Any law imposing, or authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale of electricity shall secure that the price of electricity sold to the Government of India for consumption by that Government, or to any such railway company for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway, shall be less by the amount of the tax than the price charged to other consumers.

Question: What is the stipulation of any law imposing a tax on the sale of electricity in relation to the price of electricity sold to the Government of India or any railway company?
Answer: The law ensures that the price of electricity sold to the Government of India for its consumption, or to any railway company for use in construction, maintenance or operation of any railway, shall be less by the amount of the tax than the price charged to other consumers.

Question: What is the exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or electricity in certain cases according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: No law of a State in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax in respect of any water or electricity stored, generated, consumed, distributed or sold by any authority established by any existing law or any law made by Parliament for regulating or developing any inter-State river or river valley. However, the Legislature of a State may by law impose such tax, but no such law shall have any effect unless it has, after having been reserved for the consideration of the President, received his assent.

Question: What does the Constitution of India state regarding the imposition of tax on water or electricity by a State's law in force before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that no law of a State in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax in respect of any water or electricity stored, generated, consumed, distributed or sold by any authority established by any existing law or any law made by Parliament for regulating or developing any inter-State river or river valley. However, the Legislature of a State may by law impose such tax, but no such law shall have any effect unless it has, after having been reserved for the consideration of the President, received his assent.

Question: What does the expression 'law of a State in force' include?
Answer: The expression 'law of a State in force' includes a law of a State passed or made before the commencement of the Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.

Question: What does a law of a State passed or made before the commencement of the Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas, refer to?
Answer: This refers to the expression 'law of a State in force'.

Question: What needs to be obtained before making any rule or order under the law regarding the fixation of tax rates?
Answer: The previous consent of the President.

Question: Whose consent is required to be obtained before making any rule or order under the law regarding the fixation of tax rates?
Answer: The previous consent of the President.

Question: Is the property and income of a State exempt from Union taxation?
Answer: Yes, the property and income of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation.

Question: Is the property and income of a State subject to Union taxation?
Answer: No, the property and income of a State are not subject to Union taxation.

Question: Can the Union impose any tax on a state's trade or business?
Answer: Yes, the Union can impose, or authorise the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State.

Question: Who authorizes the imposition of any tax on a state's trade or business and to what extent?
Answer: The Union can impose, or authorise the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State.

Question: What is the exception to the Union imposing tax on a state's trade or business?
Answer: The exception is any trade or business, or to any class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government.

Question: What does Parliament declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government that exempts it from the Union imposing tax on a state's trade or business?
Answer: Any trade or business, or to any class of trade or business is declared by Parliament to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government, which is the exception to the Union imposing tax.

Question: What factors determine if the expenses of a court or Commission, or pension are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State?
Answer: It depends on whether the court or Commission serves any of the separate needs of a State or the Union, or if the person has served wholly or in part in connection with the affairs of a State or the Union.

Question: What determines whether the expenses of a court, Commission, or pension are charged on the Consolidated Fund of a State or the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: If the court or Commission serves any of the separate needs of a State or the Union, or if the person has served wholly or in part in connection with the affairs of a State or the Union, it determines whether the expenses are charged on the Consolidated Fund of a State or the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: Who determines the contribution in respect of the expenses or pension in case of a disagreement?
Answer: An arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India

Question: Who appoints the arbitrator that determines the contribution in respect of the expenses or pension in case of a disagreement?
Answer: The Chief Justice of India

Question: What is the annual payment to the Travancore Devaswom Fund from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala?
Answer: Forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees

Question: Which fund receives an annual payment of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala?
Answer: Travancore Devaswom Fund

Question: What is the annual payment to the Devaswom Fund from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Tamil Nadu?
Answer: Thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees

Question: Which fund receives an annual payment of thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Tamil Nadu?
Answer: Devaswom Fund

Question: Who has the power to borrow upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The executive power of the Union

Question: Who can borrow upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: The executive power of the Union

Question: Who sets the limits for borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What entity is responsible for setting the limits for borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who has the power to borrow within the territory of India upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: The executive power of a State

Question: Who has the authority to borrow on the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State within the territory of India?
Answer: The executive power of a State

Question: Who sets the limits for borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: The Legislature of such State

Question: What body is responsible for setting the limits for borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of a State?
Answer: The Legislature of such State

Question: Can the Government of India make loans to any State?
Answer: Yes, subject to conditions laid down by or under any law made by Parliament

Question: Under what conditions can the Government of India make loans to any State?
Answer: The Government of India can make loans to any State subject to conditions laid down by or under any law made by Parliament

Question: Can a State raise any loan without the consent of the Government of India?
Answer: No, a State may not raise any loan without the consent of the Government of India if there is still outstanding any part of a loan which has been made to the State by the Government of India or by its predecessor Government.

Question: If there is still outstanding any part of a loan which has been made to a State by the Government of India or by its predecessor Government, can the State raise any loan without the consent of the Government of India?
Answer: No, a State may not raise any loan without the consent of the Government of India in such circumstances.

Question: What happens to the property and assets vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and each Governor’s Province at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: All property and assets which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and each Governor’s Province shall vest respectively in the Union and the corresponding State.

Question: Where did all the property and assets vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and each Governor’s Province vest after the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: All property and assets which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and each Governor’s Province vested respectively in the Union and the corresponding State.

Question: What happens to the rights, liabilities, and obligations of the Government of the Dominion of India and each Governor's Province at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: All rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the Dominion of India and of the Government of each Governor's Province, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations respectively of the Government of India and the Government of each corresponding State.

Question: Who assumes the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the Dominion of India and of the Government of each Governor's Province, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, at the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The rights, liabilities and obligations respectively of the Government of India and the Government of each corresponding State.

Question: What happens to the property and assets vested in any Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule?
Answer: They shall vest in the Union, if the purposes for which such property and assets were held immediately before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Union relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List.

Question: Who does the property and assets vested in any Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule vest in if the purposes for which such property and assets were held immediately before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Union relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List?
Answer: They shall vest in the Union

Question: What happens to the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of any Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule?
Answer: They shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of India, if the purposes for which such rights were acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurred before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Government of India relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List.

Question: Who assumes the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of an Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule, if the purposes for which such rights were acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurred before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Government of India relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List?
Answer: They shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of India.

Question: Who is the successor of the Government of each State specified in Part B of the First Schedule?
Answer: The Government of each State specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall be the successor of the Government of the corresponding Indian State as regards all property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations.

Question: Who shall the Government of the corresponding Indian State as regards all property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations succeed?
Answer: The Government of each State specified in Part B of the First Schedule is the successor of the Government of the corresponding Indian State as regards all property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations.

Question: What happens to any property in the territory of India which would have accrued to His Majesty or the Ruler of an Indian State by escheat or lapse, or as bona vacantia for want of a rightful owner?
Answer: It shall, if it is property situate in a State, vest in such State, and shall, in any other case, vest in the Union.

Question: Where does property in the territory of India, which would have accrued to His Majesty or the Ruler of an Indian State by escheat or lapse, or as bona vacantia for want of a rightful owner, vest if it is property situated in a State or in any other case?
Answer: It shall, if it is property situate in a State, vest in such State, and shall, in any other case, vest in the Union.

Question: What does Article 297 of the Indian Constitution state?
Answer: Article 297 states that all lands, minerals and other things of value within the territorial waters, the continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone of India shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union. Also, all other resources of the exclusive economic zone of India shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union.

Question: Which article of the Indian Constitution declares that all lands, minerals and other things of value within the territorial waters, the continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone of India shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union?
Answer: Article 297 of the Indian Constitution states this.

Question: What is the executive power of the Union and each State in relation to trade according to Article 298 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: According to Article 298, the executive power of the Union and of each State extends to carrying on any trade or business and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of contracts for any purpose. However, the executive power of the Union is subject to legislation by the State in matters that Parliament cannot make laws about. Similarly, the executive power of each State is subject to legislation by Parliament in matters that the State Legislature cannot make laws about.

Question: What does Article 298 of the Indian Constitution say about the extent of executive power of the Union and each State, and how it's affected by legislation from the respective State or the Parliament?
Answer: According to Article 298, the executive power of the Union and of each State extends to carrying on any trade or business and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of contracts for any purpose. However, the executive power of the Union is subject to legislation by the State in matters that Parliament cannot make laws about. Similarly, the executive power of each State is subject to legislation by Parliament in matters that the State Legislature cannot make laws about.

Question: How are contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union or a State expressed according to Article 299 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: According to Article 299, all contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union or of a State shall be expressed to be made by.

Question: Which article of the Indian Constitution stipulates that all contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union or of a State shall be expressed to be made by?
Answer: Article 299

Question: Who are the expressions 'Ruler' and 'Indian State' referred to as per the constitution?
Answer: In the given article, the expressions 'Ruler' and 'Indian State' have the same meanings as in article 363.

Question: According to which article do the expressions 'Ruler' and 'Indian State' have the same meanings as in a given article in the Constitution?
Answer: Article 363

Question: Who can execute contracts and property assurances according to this constitution?
Answer: The President or the Governor can execute contracts and property assurances, by authorizing certain persons to do so in a manner they direct.

Question: Who is authorized to execute contracts and property assurances, and who do they delegate to carry out this task according to the constitution?
Answer: The President or the Governor are authorized to execute contracts and property assurances, and they delegate this task to certain persons they direct.

Question: Are the President or the Governor personally liable for any contract or assurance made or executed for the purposes of this Constitution?
Answer: No, neither the President nor the Governor shall be personally liable in respect of any contract or assurance made or executed for the purposes of this Constitution.

Question: Who is not personally liable in respect of any contract or assurance made or executed for the purposes of the Constitution?
Answer: Neither the President nor the Governor are personally liable.

Question: Who can sue the Government of India?
Answer: The Government of India may be sued by the name of the Union of India.

Question: Under what name can someone sue the Government of India?
Answer: Someone can sue the Government of India under the name of the Union of India.

Question: Under what circumstances can a State Government be sued?
Answer: The Government of a State may be sued by the name of the State and may be sued in relation to their respective affairs in the like cases as the Dominion of India and the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have sued if this Constitution had not been enacted.

Question: Who can sue the Government of a State and in what circumstances, according to the constitution?
Answer: The Government of a State may be sued by the name of the State and may be sued in relation to their respective affairs in the like cases as the Dominion of India and the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have sued if this Constitution had not been enacted.

Question: What happens to legal proceedings at the commencement of this Constitution where the Dominion of India is a party?
Answer: If any legal proceedings are pending to which the Dominion of India is a party, the Union of India shall be deemed to be substituted for the Dominion in those proceedings.

Question: Who shall be deemed substituted for the Dominion of India in any legal proceedings pending at the commencement of this Constitution where the Dominion of India is a party?
Answer: The Union of India shall be deemed to be substituted for the Dominion in those proceedings.

Question: What is the right to property under this Constitution?
Answer: No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.

Question: Under what conditions can a person be deprived of his property according to this Constitution?
Answer: A person can be deprived of his property only by authority of law.

Question: What is the status of trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India?
Answer: Trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free, subject to the other provisions of this Part.

Question: What are the conditions under which trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India operate?
Answer: Trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India operate freely, subject to the other provisions of this Part.

Question: Who has the power to impose restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse?
Answer: Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse.

Question: Who may by law impose restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse?
Answer: Parliament has the power to impose restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse.

Question: Under what conditions can restrictions be imposed on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse?
Answer: Restrictions can be imposed if required in the public interest.

Question: Under what circumstances can restrictions be imposed on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse?
Answer: If it is required in the public interest.

Question: Can Parliament or the Legislature of a State give preference to one State over another in terms of trade and commerce?
Answer: No, neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State shall have power to make any law giving preference to one State over another, or making any discrimination between one State and another, in terms of trade and commerce.

Question: Does the Parliament or the Legislature of a State have the power to make a law that gives preference to one State over another, or make any discrimination between one State and another, in terms of trade and commerce?
Answer: No, neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State has the power to make any law that gives preference to one State over another, or make any discrimination between one State and another, in terms of trade and commerce.

Question: What exception allows Parliament to give preference or make discrimination between states?
Answer: Parliament can make any law giving preference or making discrimination between states if it is declared by such law that it is necessary to do so for the purpose of dealing with a situation arising from scarcity of goods in any part of the territory of India.

Question: Under what circumstances can the Parliament make a law giving preference or making discrimination between states?
Answer: Parliament can make such a law when it is necessary to deal with a situation arising from scarcity of goods in any part of the territory of India.

Question: Can a State impose taxes on goods imported from other States or the Union territories?
Answer: Yes, the Legislature of a State may by law impose on goods imported from other States or the Union territories any tax to which similar goods manufactured or produced in that State are subject.

Question: What type of tax can the Legislature of a State impose on goods imported from other States or the Union territories?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may impose any tax to which similar goods manufactured or produced in that State are subject.

Question: Can a State impose restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse?
Answer: Yes, a State can impose such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse with or within that State as may be required in the public interest.

Question: What conditions allow a State to impose restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse?
Answer: A State can impose such restrictions if they are reasonable and required in the public interest.

Question: What does Article 305 of the Indian Constitution state?
Answer: Article 305 states that nothing in articles 301 and 303 shall affect the provisions of any existing law unless the President orders otherwise. Also, nothing in article 301 shall affect the operation of any law made before the commencement of the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, or prevent Parliament or the Legislature of a State from making any law relating to the matters referred in sub-clause (ii) of clause (6) of article 19.

Question: Which article of the Indian Constitution states that nothing in articles 301 and 303 shall affect the provisions of any existing law unless the President orders otherwise, and nothing in article 301 shall affect the operation of any law made before the commencement of the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, or prevent Parliament or the Legislature of a State from making any law relating to the matters referred in sub-clause (ii) of clause (6) of article 19?
Answer: Article 305 of the Indian Constitution states this.

Question: What is the purpose of Article 307 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: Article 307 allows Parliament to appoint an authority for carrying out the purposes of articles 301, 302, 303 and 304. It can confer on the appointed authority any powers and duties it considers necessary.

Question: Which article of the Indian Constitution permits the Parliament to appoint an authority for executing the purposes of articles 301, 302, 303, and 304, and to confer on them any necessary powers and duties?
Answer: Article 307 of the Indian Constitution allows the Parliament to do this.

Question: What does Article 308 of the Indian Constitution clarify?
Answer: Article 308 clarifies that in the context of this Part of the Constitution, the expression 'State' does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Question: Which state is not included in the expression 'State' according to Article 308 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The State of Jammu and Kashmir is not included in the expression 'State' according to Article 308 of the Indian Constitution.

Question: What does Article 309 of the Indian Constitution state?
Answer: Article 309 states that, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Acts of the appropriate Legislature may regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State.

Question: What does the Indian Constitution allow the appropriate Legislature to regulate in regards to persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State?
Answer: Article 309 of the Indian Constitution allows the appropriate Legislature to regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of these persons.

Question: Who makes the rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to services and posts?
Answer: The affairs of the State

Question: What entity is responsible for making the rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to services and posts?
Answer: The affairs of the State

Question: Who holds office during the pleasure of the President?
Answer: Every person who is a member of a defence service or of a civil service of the Union or of an all-India service or holds any post connected with defence or any civil post under the Union

Question: Who are the people that are members of a defence service or of a civil service of the Union or of an all-India service or hold any post connected with defence or any civil post under the Union?
Answer: Every person who holds office during the pleasure of the President

Question: Who holds office during the pleasure of the Governor of the State?
Answer: Every person who is a member of a civil service of a State or holds any civil post under a State

Question: Who is Every person who is a member of a civil service of a State or holds any civil post under a State?
Answer: They are the ones who hold office during the pleasure of the Governor of the State

Question: Can a contract provide for the payment of compensation to a person appointed under this Constitution?
Answer: Yes, if the President or the Governor deems it necessary in order to secure the services of a person having special qualifications

Question: Who can deem it necessary for a contract to provide for the payment of compensation to a person appointed under the Constitution, in order to secure the services of a person having special qualifications?
Answer: The President or the Governor

Question: Who cannot be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate?
Answer: No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State

Question: What positions does a person hold if they cannot be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate?
Answer: A member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State

Question: What conditions need to be met before a person can be dismissed, removed, or reduced in rank?
Answer: Such a person can only be dismissed, removed, or reduced in rank after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. However, if it is proposed to impose a penalty on him after such inquiry, it may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry and it is not necessary to give such person any opportunity of making a representation on the penalty proposed.

Question: What is the process for dismissing, removing, or reducing a person's rank and what opportunity should be given to such a person during this process?
Answer: The process involves an inquiry where the person is informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in respect to those charges. If a penalty is proposed after the inquiry, it can be imposed based on the evidence presented during the inquiry. The person does not need to be given another opportunity to make a representation on the proposed penalty.

Question: Are there any exceptions to the requirements for dismissal, removal, or reduction in rank?
Answer: Yes, the requirements do not apply if a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry.

Question: Under what circumstances do the requirements for dismissal, removal, or reduction in rank not apply?
Answer: The requirements do not apply if a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry.

Question: Who decides if it is reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry in respect of dismissal, removal, or reduction in rank?
Answer: The decision on whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such an inquiry lies with the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in rank.

Question: Who has the power to decide if an inquiry can be held when it comes to the dismissal, removal, or reduction in rank of a person?
Answer: The authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in rank has the power to decide if an inquiry can be held.

Question: Under what conditions can Parliament create an All-India service?
Answer: Parliament can create an All-India service if the Council of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest to do so.

Question: What needs to happen for Parliament to create an All-India service in the national interest?
Answer: The Council of States has to declare by resolution, supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, that it is necessary or expedient to do so.

Question: What services are deemed to be created by Parliament at the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service

Question: Which services were created by Parliament at the commencement of the Constitution in India?
Answer: The Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service

Question: What is not included in the all-India judicial service?
Answer: Any post inferior to that of a district judge as defined in article 236

Question: What is defined as inferior to the post of a district judge in the all-India judicial service according to article 236?
Answer: Any post that is not included in the all-India judicial service

Question: What does the law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service may contain?
Answer: Such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of Part VI as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions of that law

Question: What may be necessary for giving effect to the law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service?
Answer: Such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of Part VI

Question: What power does the Parliament have in varying or revoking conditions of service of officers of certain services?
Answer: Parliament may by law vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the conditions of services as respects remuneration, leave and pension and the rights as respects disciplinary matters of persons who have been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this Constitution

Question: Who can vary or revoke the conditions of services such as remuneration, leave, pension and disciplinary matters of persons appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The Parliament has the power to vary or revoke these conditions of service.

Question: Who can the Parliament vary or revoke the conditions of service for?
Answer: Persons who, having been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this Constitution, continue to serve under the Government of India or of a State in any service or post; and persons who, having been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this Constitution, retired or otherwise ceased to be in service at any time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972

Question: Who were the persons appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this Constitution and continued to serve or retired before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972?
Answer: The Parliament can vary or revoke the conditions of service for these persons.

Question: What does the Constitution of India state about the empowerment of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that nothing in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be construed as empowering Parliament to vary or revoke, after his appointment to such post, the conditions of his service to his disadvantage except in so far as such conditions of service are applicable to him by reason of his being a person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India.

Question: What does sub-clause (a) and sub-clause (b) of the Constitution of India state about the power of Parliament to vary or revoke the conditions of service after a person's appointment, particularly to his disadvantage?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that nothing in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be construed as empowering Parliament to vary or revoke, after his appointment to such post, the conditions of his service to his disadvantage except in so far as such conditions of service are applicable to him by reason of his being a person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India.

Question: What is the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court or any other court in disputes according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any provision of, or any endorsement on, any covenant, agreement or other similar instrument which was entered into or executed by any person referred to in clause (1), or arising out of any letter issued to such person, in relation to his appointment to any civil service of the Crown in India or his continuance in service under the Government of the Dominion of India or a Province thereof.

Question: What does the Constitution of India state about the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and other courts in disputes arising from provisions, endorsements, covenants, agreements or similar instruments entered into by any person referenced in clause (1), or from any letter issued to such person in relation to his appointment to any civil service of the Crown in India or his continuance in service under the Government of the Dominion of India or a Province thereof?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in any such dispute.

Question: What is stated in the transitional provisions of the Constitution of India?
Answer: The transitional provisions of the Constitution of India state that until other provision is made in this behalf under this Constitution, all the laws in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution and applicable to any public service or any post which continues to exist after the commencement of this Constitution, as an all-India service or as se

Question: What do the laws in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution of India apply to according to the transitional provisions of the Constitution?
Answer: According to the transitional provisions of the Constitution of India, the laws in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution apply to any public service or any post which continues to exist after the commencement of this Constitution, as an all-India service.

Question: What is the effect of the provisions of a certain article according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that the provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in article 314 as originally enacted or in any other provision of this Constitution.

Question: What does the Constitution of India state about the effect of the provisions of a certain article, especially in relation to article 314 and other provisions of the Constitution?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that the provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in article 314 as originally enacted or in any other provision of this Constitution.

Question: What does the Constitution of India's Chapter II cover?
Answer: Public Service Commissions

Question: Which chapter of the Constitution of India covers Public Service Commissions?
Answer: Chapter II

Question: What is the purpose of a Public Service Commission according to the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The Public Service Commission serves the needs of the Union or the State as respects the particular matter in question.

Question: Who serves the needs of the Union or the State as respects the particular matter in question, according to the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The Public Service Commission serves the needs of the Union or the State in this regard.

Question: Can two or more states have one Public Service Commission?
Answer: Yes, two or more States may agree to have one Public Service Commission.

Question: Can two or more States agree to have one Public Service Commission?
Answer: Yes, two or more states can have one Public Service Commission.

Question: Who is responsible for appointing the Chairman and the members of the Public Service Commission?
Answer: The Chairman and other members of a Public Service Commission are appointed by the President in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and by the Governor in the case of a State Commission.

Question: Who does the President and the Governor appoint in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission and a State Commission respectively?
Answer: The President appoints the Chairman and other members of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, while the Governor appoints the same for a State Commission.

Question: What does the Indian Constitution say about the continuation of services or posts under the Union or a State?
Answer: Services or posts under the Union or a State shall continue in force so far as consistent with the provisions of this Constitution.

Question: What does the Constitution provision regarding the continuation of services or posts under the Union or a State?
Answer: The Indian Constitution says that services or posts under the Union or a State shall continue in force so far as consistent with the provisions of this Constitution.

Question: What is the minimum years of service required for someone to be considered for appointment in the Public Service Commission?
Answer: Ten years

Question: How many years of service are required for someone to be considered for appointment in the Public Service Commission?
Answer: Ten years

Question: Who would perform the duties of the Chairman of the Commission in case of absence or other reasons?
Answer: The duties would be performed by one of the other members of the Commission as appointed by the President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor of the State in the case of a State Commission.

Question: Who appoints the member to perform the duties of the Chairman of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission in case of absence or other reasons?
Answer: The President appoints one of the other members to perform the duties.

Question: What is the term of office for a member of a Public Service Commission?
Answer: Six years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains, in the case of the Union Commission, the age of sixty-five years, and in the case of a State Commission or a Joint Commission, the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier.

Question: How long can a member serve in a Public Service Commission before he attains the age of sixty-five years in the Union Commission, or sixty-two years in a State Commission or a Joint Commission?
Answer: Six years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

Question: How can a member of a Public Service Commission resign his office?
Answer: A member of a Public Service Commission may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, to the President, and in the case of a State Commission, to the Governor of the State.

Question: To whom should a member of a Public Service Commission address his resignation letter if he wants to resign from the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and to whom if he wants to resign from a State Commission?
Answer: A member of a Public Service Commission should address his resignation letter to the President if he wants to resign from the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and to the Governor of the State if he wants to resign from a State Commission.

Question: Is a person who holds office as a member of a Public Service Commission eligible for reappointment on the expiration of his term?
Answer: No, a person who holds office as a member of a Public Service Commission is ineligible for reappointment on the expiration of his term.

Question: Can a member of a Public Service Commission be reappointed after his term expires?
Answer: No, a member of a Public Service Commission cannot be reappointed after his term expires.

Question: Who can remove the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission from office?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to remove the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission from office?
Answer: The President

Question: On what grounds can the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission be removed from his office?
Answer: On the ground of misbehaviour after the Supreme Court has reported that the Chairman or such other member ought on any such ground to be removed.

Question: What should the Supreme Court report for the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission to be removed from his office?
Answer: The Supreme Court should report that the Chairman or such other member ought to be removed on the ground of misbehaviour.

Question: Who can suspend from office the Chairman or any other member of the Commission?
Answer: The President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor in the case of a State Commission

Question: Who has the authority to suspend the Chairman or any other member of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and who has the authority in the case of a State Commission?
Answer: The President has the authority to suspend the Chairman or any other member of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor has the authority in the case of a State Commission

Question: Under what circumstances can the President remove from office the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission, disregarding clause (1)?
Answer: If the Chairman or such other member is adjudged an insolvent, engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office, or is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body.

Question: What are the reasons for which the President can remove the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission, disregarding clause (1)?
Answer: The President can remove the Chairman or such other member if they are adjudged an insolvent, if they engage during their term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of their office, or if they are, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body.

Question: What is considered misbehaviour for the purposes of clause (1) if the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission is concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or the Government of a State?
Answer: If he participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he is deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.

Question: What actions by the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission related to a contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or the Government of a State are deemed as misbehaviour?
Answer: If he participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he is deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.

Question: Who can determine the number of members and their conditions of service in a Union Commission?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the power to determine the number of members and their conditions of service in a Union Commission?
Answer: The President

Question: Who can set the conditions of service for a State Commission?
Answer: The Governor of the State

Question: Who has the authority to set the conditions of service for a State Commission?
Answer: The Governor of the State

Question: What happens to the conditions of service of a member of a Public Service Commission after his appointment?
Answer: The conditions of service of a member of a Public Service Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

Question: Can the conditions of service of a member of a Public Service Commission be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment?
Answer: No, the conditions of service of a member of a Public Service Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

Question: What happens to the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission after ceasing to hold office?
Answer: The Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be ineligible for further employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State.

Question: Who becomes ineligible for further employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State after their term ends?
Answer: The Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission becomes ineligible for further employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State after their term ends.

Question: What are the possible appointments for the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission after ceasing to hold office?
Answer: The Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of any other State Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State.

Question: Can the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission be employed under the Government of India or under the Government of a State after ceasing to hold office?
Answer: No, the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission is not eligible for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State after ceasing to hold office. They are only eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of any other State Public Service Commission.

Question: What are the possible appointments for a member other than the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission after ceasing to hold office?
Answer: A member other than the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State.

Question: What roles can a member, other than the Chairman, of the Union Public Service Commission be appointed to after they cease to hold their office?
Answer: After ceasing to hold office, a member other than the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission is eligible to be appointed as the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission. However, they are not eligible for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State.

Question: What are the possible appointments for a member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission after ceasing to hold office?
Answer: A member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of that or any other State Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State.

Question: Can a member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission be appointed as the Chairman or any other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of that or any other State Public Service Commission after he/she ceases to hold office?
Answer: Yes, a member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission is eligible for such appointments after ceasing to hold office.

Question: Who conducts examinations for appointments to the services of the Union and the State?
Answer: Public Service Commissions

Question: What is the responsibility of the Public Service Commissions in relation to the services of the Union and the State?
Answer: They conduct examinations for appointments to the services of the Union and the State.

Question: What is the duty of the Union Public Service Commission if requested by two or more States?
Answer: To assist those States in framing and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services for which candidates possessing special qualifications are required.

Question: What happens when two or more states request assistance from the Union Public Service Commission in framing and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services requiring candidates with special qualifications?
Answer: The duty of the Union Public Service Commission, if requested by two or more States, is to assist those States in framing and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services for which candidates possessing special qualifications are required.

Question: Who should be consulted on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil posts?
Answer: The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission

Question: What are the responsibilities of the Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission in relation to civil services and civil posts?
Answer: They should be consulted on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil posts.

Question: Who should be consulted on the principles to be followed in making appointments to civil services and posts?
Answer: The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission

Question: What is the role of The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission in relation to civil services and posts?
Answer: They should be consulted on the principles to be followed in making appointments to civil services and posts.

Question: Who should be consulted on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the Government of India or the Government of a State in a civil capacity?
Answer: The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission

Question: Who should be consulted on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the Government of India or the Government of a State in a civil capacity?
Answer: The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission

Question: Who should be consulted on any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries sustained by a person while serving under the Government?
Answer: The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission

Question: What is the role of The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission in relation to claims for a pension due to injuries sustained while serving under the Government?
Answer: They should be consulted on any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries sustained by a person while serving under the Government.

Question: What is the duty of a Public Service Commission?
Answer: To advise on any matter consulted on, including recruitment methods, appointment principles, disciplinary matters, and claims related to legal costs or pensions.

Question: What are some matters that a Public Service Commission might be consulted on and asked to advise about?
Answer: A Public Service Commission might be consulted on and asked to advise about recruitment methods, appointment principles, disciplinary matters, and claims related to legal costs or pensions.

Question: Who can refer matters to a Public Service Commission?
Answer: The President or the Governor of the State

Question: Who has the authority to refer matters to a Public Service Commission?
Answer: The President or the Governor of the State

Question: Who can make regulations specifying the matters in which it shall not be necessary for a Public Service Commission to be consulted?
Answer: The President and the Governor of a State

Question: Who can make regulations specifying the matters in which it shall not be necessary for a Public Service Commission to be consulted?
Answer: The President and the Governor of a State

Question: What happens to the regulations made under the proviso to clause (3) by the President or the Governor of a State?
Answer: They shall be laid for not less than fourteen days before each House of Parliament or the House or each House of the Legislature of the State, and shall be subject to modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as both Houses of Parliament or the House or both Houses of the Legislature of the State may make during the session in which they are so laid.

Question: What is the process and duration for which regulations made under the proviso to clause (3) by the President or the Governor of a State are laid before each House of Parliament or the Legislature of the State, and what can be done to them during that session?
Answer: The regulations are laid for not less than fourteen days before each House of Parliament or the House or each House of the Legislature of the State. During this session, they can be subject to modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as both Houses of Parliament or the House or both Houses of the Legislature of the State may decide.

Question: What can an Act made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State provide for Public Service Commissions?
Answer: It may provide for the exercise of additional functions by the Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission as respects the services of the Union or the State and also as respects the services of any local authority or other body corporate constituted by law or of any public institution.

Question: What additional functions may an Act made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State provide for the Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission to exercise?
Answer: The Act may provide for the exercise of additional functions as respects the services of the Union or the State and also as respects the services of any local authority or other body corporate constituted by law or of any public institution.

Question: Who bears the expenses of the Public Service Commissions?
Answer: The Union or a State

Question: Who is responsible for bearing the expenses of the Public Service Commissions?
Answer: The Union or a State

Question: Who is responsible for presenting an annual report of the work done by the Union Commission?
Answer: The Union Commission

Question: Who presents an annual report of their work done?
Answer: The Union Commission

Question: Who receives the annual report from the Union Commission?
Answer: The President

Question: Who does the Union Commission send their annual report to?
Answer: The President

Question: What happens after the President receives the annual report from the Union Commission?
Answer: The President shall cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: What does the President do with the annual report from the Union Commission, particularly when the advice of the Commission was not accepted?
Answer: The President shall cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: Who is responsible for presenting an annual report of the work done by a State Commission?
Answer: The State Commission

Question: Who presents the annual report of their work done?
Answer: The State Commission

Question: Who receives the annual report from the State Commission?
Answer: The Governor of the State

Question: Who does the Governor of the State receive the annual report from?
Answer: The State Commission

Question: What can be resolved by administrative tribunals according to clause 323A?
Answer: Disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation owned or controlled by the Government.

Question: What do disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation owned or controlled by the Government pertain to under clause 323A?
Answer: These can be resolved by administrative tribunals.

Question: Who can establish an administrative tribunal according to clause 323A(2)?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Which body has the authority to establish an administrative tribunal according to clause 323A(2)?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What does the administrative tribunal for each State specify?
Answer: The jurisdiction, powers and authority which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals.

Question: What does the jurisdiction, powers and authority of each of the said tribunals refer to?
Answer: They are specified by the administrative tribunal for each State.

Question: What does the procedure for the said tribunals include?
Answer: Provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence.

Question: What does the term 'provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence' refer to in a tribunal procedure?
Answer: It refers to the procedure for the said tribunals.

Question: What jurisdiction is excluded from all courts?
Answer: The jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to the disputes or complaints referred to in clause (1).

Question: Which court's jurisdiction is not excluded in relation to disputes or complaints referred to in clause (1)?
Answer: The Supreme Court under article 136

Question: What happens to the cases pending before any court or other authority before the establishment of the tribunal?
Answer: They are transferred to the administrative tribunal.

Question: Where are the cases pending before any court or other authority transferred to upon the establishment of the tribunal?
Answer: They are transferred to the administrative tribunal.

Question: What provisions does the parliament contain for the tribunals?
Answer: Supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.

Question: What does the phrase 'supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions' refer to in the context of parliamentary support for tribunals?
Answer: It refers to the provisions contained in the parliament for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.

Question: What matters can the appropriate Legislature provide for the adjudication or trial by tribunals?
Answer: Any disputes, complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the matters specified in clause (2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws.

Question: What types of matters can the Legislature make laws for, that can be adjudicated or tried by tribunals?
Answer: Any disputes, complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the matters specified in clause (2)

Question: What are the matters referred to in clause (1)?
Answer: Levy, assessment, collection and enforcement of any tax; foreign exchange, import and export across customs frontiers; industrial and labour disputes; land reforms by way of acquisition.

Question: What does the clause (1) refer to, if it includes the levy, assessment, collection and enforcement of any tax; foreign exchange, import and export across customs frontiers; industrial and labour disputes; land reforms by way of acquisition?
Answer: The matters referred to in clause (1)

Question: What can a law made under clause (1) provide for?
Answer: The establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals, the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals, the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals, the exclusion of the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to all or any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the said tribunals, the transfer to each such tribunal of any cases pending before any court or any other authority immediately before the establishment of such tribunal as would have been within the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen after such establishment.

Question: What does the jurisdiction, powers, authority, procedure, exclusion of the jurisdiction of all courts except the Supreme Court under article 136, and transfer of any cases pending before any court or any other authority immediately before the establishment of the tribunal pertain to?
Answer: These pertain to a law made under clause (1), which can provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals.

Question: What is included in the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (h)?
Answer: Ceiling on urban property, elections to either House of Parliament or the House or either House of the Legislature of a State, production, procurement, supply and distribution of food-stuffs and such other goods as the President may declare to be essential goods, rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issues including the right, title and interest of landlords and tenants, offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in these sub-clauses, and any matter incidental to these matters.

Question: What does the Ceiling on urban property, elections to either House of Parliament or the House or either House of the Legislature of a State, production, procurement, supply and distribution of food-stuffs and such other goods as the President may declare to be essential goods, rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issues including the right, title and interest of landlords and tenants, offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in these sub-clauses, and any matter incidental to these matters refer to in legal terms?
Answer: These refer to the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (h).

Question: What is the power of the President in relation to food-stuffs and other goods?
Answer: The President may, by public notification, declare certain goods to be essential goods for the purpose of this article and control the prices of such goods.

Question: What can the President do by public notification regarding essential goods and their prices?
Answer: The President may, by public notification, declare certain goods to be essential goods for the purpose of this article and control the prices of such goods.

Question: What are some of the matters that can be regulated under the mentioned law?
Answer: Regulation can involve the ceiling on agricultural land or urban property, elections to Houses of Parliament or the Legislature of a State, production and distribution of essential goods, control of rent and tenancy issues, and offences against laws with respect to these matters.

Question: What can regulation under a law involve?
Answer: Regulation can involve the ceiling on agricultural land or urban property, elections to Houses of Parliament or the Legislature of a State, production and distribution of essential goods, control of rent and tenancy issues, and offences against laws with respect to these matters.

Question: What does the appropriate Legislature refer to in this article?
Answer: In this article, the 'appropriate Legislature' refers to Parliament or, as the case may be, a State Legislature competent to make laws with respect to such matter in accordance with the provisions of Part XI.

Question: Which institution does the term 'appropriate Legislature' in this article refer to, and under what conditions?
Answer: The 'appropriate Legislature' in this article refers to Parliament or, as the case may be, a State Legislature competent to make laws with respect to such matter in accordance with the provisions of Part XI.

Question: Who is in charge of the superintendence, direction and control of elections according to Part XV, Section 324?
Answer: The superintendence, direction and control of elections are vested in a Commission referred to in this Constitution as the Election Commission.

Question: What is the Commission referred to in the Constitution that is vested with the superintendence, direction and control of elections?
Answer: The Commission referred to in the Constitution that is vested with the superintendence, direction and control of elections is the Election Commission according to Part XV, Section 324.

Question: Who makes up the Election Commission?
Answer: The Election Commission consists of the Chief Election Commissioner and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may from time to time fix.

Question: Who has the authority to fix the number of Election Commissioners in the Election Commission?
Answer: The President has the authority to fix the number of Election Commissioners in the Election Commission.

Question: How are the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners appointed?
Answer: The appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners is made by the President, subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament.

Question: Who is responsible for the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, and is it subject to any provisions?
Answer: The President is responsible for the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, and it is subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament.

Question: Who acts as the Chairman of the Election Commission when any other Election Commissioner is appointed?
Answer: The Chief Election Commissioner acts as the Chairman of the Election Commission when any other Election Commissioner is appointed.

Question: Who takes on the role of Chairman of the Election Commission during the appointment of any other Election Commissioner?
Answer: The Chief Election Commissioner

Question: Who can the President consult with before appointing for each general election to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of each State?
Answer: Before each general election to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of each State, the President may also appoint after consultation with the Election Commission.

Question: Who does the President need to consult with when appointing before each general election to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of each State?
Answer: The President needs to consult with the Election Commission.

Question: Who can assign Regional Commissioners to assist the Election Commission?
Answer: The President can assign Regional Commissioners to assist the Election Commission.

Question: Who can the President assign to assist the Election Commission?
Answer: The President can assign Regional Commissioners to assist the Election Commission.

Question: Who determines the conditions of service and tenure of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners?
Answer: The conditions of service and tenure of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners are determined by the President.

Question: Who determines the conditions of service and tenure of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners?
Answer: The President

Question: Under what conditions can the Chief Election Commissioner be removed from his office?
Answer: The Chief Election Commissioner can be removed from his office in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: Who can be removed from their office in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The Chief Election Commissioner can be removed from his office in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Question: Who can make staff available to the Election Commission when requested?
Answer: The President, or the Governor of a State, can make staff available to the Election Commission when requested.

Question: Who can the President, or the Governor of a State, make staff available to when requested?
Answer: The President, or the Governor of a State, can make staff available to the Election Commission when requested.

Question: Who can be included in the general electoral roll?
Answer: Any person can be included in the general electoral roll, regardless of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them.

Question: Are there any restrictions based on religion, race, caste, sex, etc. for inclusion in the general electoral roll?
Answer: No, there are no restrictions based on religion, race, caste, sex or any of them for inclusion in the general electoral roll.

Question: On what basis are elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States held?
Answer: Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of every State are held on the basis of adult suffrage.

Question: What is the basis for conducting elections to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of every State?
Answer: Adult suffrage

Question: Who is entitled to be registered as a voter in India?
Answer: Every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of age and is not disqualified under the Constitution or any law on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice.

Question: What are the qualifications and disqualifications for a person to be registered as a voter in India?
Answer: A person must be a citizen of India, be at least eighteen years of age, and not be disqualified under the Constitution or any law on the grounds of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime, or corrupt or illegal practice.

Question: What power is given to the Parliament of India with respect to elections to Legislatures?
Answer: Parliament may from time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections including the preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies and all other matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses.

Question: What provisions can the Parliament of India make with respect to elections, including the preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies, and all other matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses?
Answer: The Parliament of India is given the power to from time to time by law make provisions with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to Legislatures.

Question: What power is given to the Legislature of a State with respect to elections?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may from time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, the elections including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses.

Question: What provisions can the Legislature of a State make by law with respect to the elections?
Answer: The Legislature of a State may from time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, the elections including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses.

Question: What does article 329 of the Constitution of India state?
Answer: Article 329 bars interference by courts in electoral matters. This means the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be called in question in any court.

Question: Which article of the Constitution of India bars interference by courts in electoral matters, specifically regarding the validity of laws relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies made under article 327 or article 328?
Answer: Article 329 of the Constitution of India bars interference by courts in these electoral matters.

Question: What can't be called into question without an election petition?
Answer: The validity of any proceeding in the Legislature of a State

Question: What needs an election petition to be called into question?
Answer: The validity of any proceeding in the Legislature of a State

Question: What was repealed by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978?
Answer: Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of Prime Minister and Speaker

Question: What did the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978 repeal in relation to elections to Parliament in the case of Prime Minister and Speaker?
Answer: Special provision

Question: What is the provision made under Part XVI?
Answer: Special provisions relating to certain classes

Question: What does Part XVI specifically relate to?
Answer: Special provisions relating to certain classes

Question: What are the seats in the House of the People reserved for?
Answer: (a) the Scheduled Castes; (b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam; (c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam

Question: Who are the (a) Scheduled Castes; (b) Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam; (c) Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam reserved seats for in the House of the People?
Answer: These are the groups for which seats in the House of the People are reserved.

Question: How is the number of reserved seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes determined?
Answer: The number of seats reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to that State or Union territory as the population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the State or Union territory.

Question: What does the proportion of reserved seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in a State or Union territory depend on?
Answer: The proportion of reserved seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes depends on their population in that State or Union territory.

Question: What does the term 'population' refer to in this context?
Answer: The population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published

Question: What is meant by 'The population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published'?
Answer: In this context, it refers to the term 'population'.

Question: What is construed as a reference to the 2001 census?
Answer: The last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published

Question: What is the definition of the 'last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published'?
Answer: It is construed as a reference to the 2001 census

Question: What can the President do if he believes the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People?
Answer: The President may nominate not more than two members of that community to the House of the People

Question: Who can the President nominate to the House of the People if he believes a certain community is not adequately represented?
Answer: The President may nominate not more than two members of the Anglo-Indian community

Question: What are the exceptions for seat reservations for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States?
Answer: The Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam are not included in the seat reservations

Question: Which Scheduled Tribes are not included in the seat reservations in the Legislative Assemblies of the States?
Answer: The Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam are not included in the seat reservations

Question: What is the basis for the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State?
Answer: The population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State

Question: What determines the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of a State?
Answer: The basis for the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State is the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State

Question: What happens until the taking effect, under article 170, of the re-adjustment, on the basis of the first census after the year 2026?
Answer: The seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland

Question: Which seats are reserved under article 170 until the re-adjustment takes effect on the basis of the first census after the year 2026?
Answer: The seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland

Question: What does the Constitution (Fiftyseventh Amendment) Act, 1987 refer to regarding seats in the existing Assembly?
Answer: It refers to how all the seats except one are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes.

Question: Who holds all the seats except one according to the Constitution (Fiftyseventh Amendment) Act, 1987 in the existing Assembly?
Answer: All the seats except one are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes.

Question: What does clause (3B) say about the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura?
Answer: Until the readjustment under article 170 takes effect on the basis of the first census after the year 2026, the seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes shall bear a proportion not less than the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes as on the date of coming into force of the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992.

Question: What happens until the readjustment under article 170 takes effect on the basis of the first census after the year 2026, regarding the seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura?
Answer: According to clause (3B), until the readjustment under article 170 takes effect, the seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes shall bear a proportion not less than the number of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes as on the date of coming into force of the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992.

Question: How is the number of seats reserved for an autonomous district in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam determined?
Answer: It is determined by a proportion not less than the population of the district bears to the total population of the State.

Question: What determines the number of seats reserved for an autonomous district in the Legislative Assembly of Assam?
Answer: The number of seats is determined by a proportion not less than the population of the district bears to the total population of the State.

Question: What areas can the constituencies for the seats reserved for any autonomous district of Assam comprise?
Answer: They cannot comprise any area outside that district.

Question: Can the constituencies for the seats reserved for any autonomous district of Assam comprise any area outside that district?
Answer: No, they cannot comprise any area outside that district.

Question: Who is eligible for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State from any constituency of an autonomous district of the State of Assam?
Answer: Only a person who is a member of a Scheduled Tribe of an autonomous district of the State of Assam is eligible.

Question: Who is the only person eligible for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State from any constituency of an autonomous district of the State of Assam?
Answer: A person who is a member of a Scheduled Tribe of an autonomous district of the State of Assam.

Question: What is the role of the Governor in regards to the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the Legislative Assembly of a State?
Answer: The Governor of a State may nominate one member of the Anglo-Indian community to the Legislative Assembly of the State if he believes that the community needs representation and is not adequately represented therein.

Question: Under what circumstances can the Governor of a State nominate a member of the Anglo-Indian community to the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: The Governor of a State may nominate one member of the Anglo-Indian community to the Legislative Assembly of the State if he believes that the community needs representation and is not adequately represented therein.

Question: What will happen to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community after a certain period?
Answer: The provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community by nomination, will cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of eighty years in respect of clause (a) and seventy years in respect of clause (b) from the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: When will the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community by nomination, cease to have effect?
Answer: The provisions will cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of eighty years in respect of clause (a) and seventy years in respect of clause (b) from the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What should be taken into consideration in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State?
Answer: The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration.

Question: What specific claims should be considered when making appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State, in order to maintain efficiency of administration?
Answer: The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes should be considered.

Question: Can any provision be made in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: Yes, nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

Question: Is it allowed to make any provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes according to this article?
Answer: Yes, nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

Question: What is the provision for the Anglo-Indian community in railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the Union during the first two years after the commencement of the constitution?
Answer: Appointments of members of the Anglo-Indian community to posts in the railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the Union shall be made on the same basis as immediately before the fifteenth day of August, 1947.

Question: On what basis were appointments to posts in the railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the Union made for the Anglo-Indian community immediately before the fifteenth day of August, 1947?
Answer: The appointments were made on the same basis as during the first two years after the commencement of the constitution.

Question: After the first two years, what happens to the number of posts reserved for the Anglo-Indian community?
Answer: During every succeeding period of two years, the number of posts reserved for the members of the said community in the said services shall, as nearly as possible, be less by ten per cent. than the numbers so reserved during the immediately preceding period of two years.

Question: What is the change in the number of posts reserved for the Anglo-Indian community in every succeeding period of two years?
Answer: During every succeeding period of two years, the number of posts reserved for the members of the said community in the said services shall, as nearly as possible, be less by ten per cent. than the numbers so reserved during the immediately preceding period of two years.

Question: When will all reservations for the Anglo-Indian community cease?
Answer: At the end of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution all such reservations shall cease.

Question: When will the reservations for the Anglo-Indian community cease, according to the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: At the end of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution all such reservations shall cease.

Question: Can members of the Anglo-Indian community be appointed to posts other than those reserved for them?
Answer: Yes, members of the Anglo-Indian community can be appointed to posts other than, or in addition to, those reserved for the community if they are found qualified for appointment on merit as compared with the members of other communities.

Question: Can members of the Anglo-Indian community be appointed to posts in addition to those reserved for them, if they are found qualified on merit compared with members of other communities?
Answer: Yes, members of the Anglo-Indian community can be appointed to posts other than, or in addition to, those reserved for them if they are found qualified for appointment on merit as compared with the members of other communities.

Question: What is the provision with respect to educational grants for the benefit of Anglo-Indian community during the first three financial years after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: The same grants, if any, shall be made by the Union and by each State for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian community in respect of education as were made in the financial year ending on the thirty-first day of March, 1948.

Question: What is the continuity in educational grants for the Anglo-Indian community by the Union and each State, as per the Constitution?
Answer: The same grants, if any, shall be made by the Union and by each State for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian community in respect of education as were made in the financial year ending on the thirty-first day of March, 1948.

Question: What happens to the educational grants for the Anglo-Indian community after the first three financial years?
Answer: During every succeeding period of three years the grants may be less by ten per cent. than those for the immediately preceding period of three years.

Question: By what percentage may the educational grants for the Anglo-Indian community decrease after every succeeding period of three years compared to the immediately preceding period?
Answer: The grants may be less by ten per cent than those for the immediately preceding period of three years.

Question: When will the special concession of educational grants for the Anglo-Indian community end?
Answer: At the end of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution such grants, to the extent to which they are a special concession to the Anglo-Indian community, will end.

Question: For how long from the commencement of this Constitution will the special concession of educational grants for the Anglo-Indian community continue?
Answer: The special concession of educational grants for the Anglo-Indian community will continue for ten years from the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What is the minimum percentage of annual admissions that must be available to members of communities other than the Anglo-Indian community for an educational institution to receive a grant under this article?
Answer: 40%

Question: What percentage of annual admissions must be available to members of communities other than the Anglo-Indian community for an educational institution to receive a grant under this article?
Answer: 40%

Question: What is the National Commission for Scheduled Castes?
Answer: A commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.

Question: What is the official title given to the commission assigned for the Scheduled Castes?
Answer: The official title is the National Commission for Scheduled Castes.

Question: Who appoints the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission?
Answer: The President.

Question: Who is responsible for appointing the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission?
Answer: The President.

Question: What is the duty of the National Commission for Scheduled Castes?
Answer: To investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards; to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes; to participate and advise on the planning process of socioeconomic development of the Scheduled Castes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State; to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards; to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection of the Scheduled Castes.

Question: What does the National Commission for Scheduled Castes do to ensure the protection and development of Scheduled Castes under the Constitution and other laws?
Answer: The National Commission for Scheduled Castes is responsible for investigating and monitoring all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards. It also inquires into specific complaints about the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes. The commission participates and advises on the planning process of socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes and evaluates their development progress under the Union and any State. It also presents to the President, annually and at other times as deemed fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards and makes recommendations in such reports about the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection of the Scheduled Castes.

Question: What are some of the powers of the Commission as per the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Commission has the powers of a civil court trying a suit, particularly in respect of the following matters: summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath; requiring the discovery and production of any document; receiving evidence on affidavits; requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and any other matter which the President may determine by rule.

Question: What does it mean when it is stated that the Commission in the Constitution of India has the powers of a civil court trying a suit, and what are some specific examples of these powers?
Answer: When it is stated that the Commission has the powers of a civil court trying a suit, it means that the Commission can perform functions similar to that of a civil court, such as summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath; requiring the discovery and production of any document; receiving evidence on affidavits; requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and any other matter which the President may determine by rule.

Question: Who should consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Union and every State Government should consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes.

Question: Who is required to consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes as per the Constitution of India?
Answer: The Union and every State Government are required to consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes.

Question: What happens after the President receives a report related to Scheduled Castes?
Answer: The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

Question: What does the President do with a report related to Scheduled Castes once he receives it?
Answer: The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

Question: What happens if a report from the Commission relates to a matter with which a State Government is concerned?
Answer: A copy of such report will be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

Question: What procedure is followed when a report from the Commission that concerns a State Government is received?
Answer: A copy of such report will be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

Question: How are references to the Scheduled Castes to be construed in this article of the Constitution of India?
Answer: References to the Scheduled Castes in this article of the Constitution of India should be construed as including all castes, tribes, or communities considered as such by the government.

Question: What does the term 'Scheduled Castes' include as per the article of the Constitution of India?
Answer: The term 'Scheduled Castes' in the article of the Constitution of India includes all castes, tribes, or communities considered as such by the government.

Question: What is the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes is a commission for the Scheduled Tribes, consisting of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members. It is appointed by the President and has the power to regulate its own procedure. Its duties include investigating and monitoring matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes, inquiring into specific complaints, advising on the planning process of socioeconomic development of the Scheduled Tribes, and making recommendations for their protection, welfare and development.

Question: What are the duties and powers of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes, and how is its membership determined?
Answer: The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes consists of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members, who are appointed by the President. The Commission has the power to regulate its own procedure. Its duties include investigating and monitoring matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes, inquiring into specific complaints, advising on the planning process of socioeconomic development of the Scheduled Tribes, and making recommendations for their protection, welfare and development.

Question: Who appoints the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes are appointed by the President.

Question: Who appoints the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The President

Question: What are the duties of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The duties of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes include investigating and monitoring all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes, inquiring into specific complaints, participating and advising on the planning process of socioeconomic development of the Scheduled Tribes, presenting reports upon the working of those safeguards, making recommendations for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes, and discharging other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as the President may determine.

Question: What does the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes do in relation to investigating and monitoring matters, inquiring into complaints, participating and advising on planning processes, presenting reports, making recommendations, and discharging functions as determined by the President?
Answer: The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes is responsible for investigating and monitoring all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes, inquiring into specific complaints, participating and advising on the planning process of socioeconomic development of the Scheduled Tribes, presenting reports upon the working of those safeguards, making recommendations for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes, and discharging other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as the President may determine.

Question: Who does the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes present their reports to?
Answer: The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes presents their reports to the President.

Question: Who receives the reports from the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The President receives the reports from the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.

Question: What powers does the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes have?
Answer: The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes has the power to regulate its own procedure.

Question: Which organization has the power to regulate its own procedure?
Answer: The National Commission for Scheduled Tribes has the power to regulate its own procedure.

Question: What is the duty of the President in relation to the reports mentioned in the text?
Answer: The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.

Question: What is the course of action for the President regarding reports that are to be laid before each House of Parliament, and how does he handle recommendations related to the Union?
Answer: The President's duty is to cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union. He also gives reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.

Question: What happens if a report relates to a matter with which any State Government is concerned?
Answer: A copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

Question: What is the procedure when a report that concerns a State Government is generated?
Answer: A copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

Question: What powers does the Commission have while investigating a matter?
Answer: The Commission has all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath, requiring the discovery and production of any document, receiving evidence on affidavits, requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office, issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents, and any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.

Question: What powers does a civil court trying a suit have that the Commission also possesses during an investigation?
Answer: The Commission, like a civil court trying a suit, has the power to summon and enforce attendance of any person from any part of India and examine them under oath, require discovery and production of any document, receive evidence on affidavits, requisition any public record or copy thereof from any court or office, issue commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents, and any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.

Question: Who should consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Union and every State Government should consult the Commission.

Question: Who should be consulted by the Union and every State Government on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Commission should be consulted.

Question: What is the National Commission for Backward Classes?
Answer: The National Commission for Backward Classes is a Commission for the socially and educationally backward classes.

Question: Which commission is for the socially and educationally backward classes?
Answer: The National Commission for Backward Classes is for the socially and educationally backward classes.

Question: What is the composition of the Commission?
Answer: The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members.

Question: How many members does the Commission consist of and what are their positions?
Answer: The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members.

Question: Who appoints the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to appoint the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the power to regulate the procedure of the Commission?
Answer: The Commission

Question: Whose procedure is regulated by themselves?
Answer: The Commission

Question: What is the duty of the Commission regarding the socially and educationally backward classes?
Answer: To investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for them, inquire into specific complaints, participate and advise on their socio-economic development, evaluate their progress, present reports to the President, make recommendations for their protection and welfare and discharge other functions as specified by the President.

Question: What are the responsibilities of a commission dedicated to the advancement and welfare of socially and educationally backward classes, and to whom do they present their reports?
Answer: Their responsibilities include investigating and monitoring all matters relating to the safeguards provided for them, inquiring into specific complaints, participating and advising on their socio-economic development, evaluating their progress, making recommendations for their protection and welfare and discharging other functions as specified by the President. The commission presents their reports to the President.

Question: Who should the Commission present their reports to?
Answer: The President

Question: Who should receive the reports from the Commission?
Answer: The President

Question: What happens to the reports presented by the Commission?
Answer: The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations.

Question: Who is responsible for presenting the Commission's reports to each House of Parliament and what does this presentation include?
Answer: The President is responsible for presenting the Commission's reports to each House of Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations.

Question: What happens when a report relates to a matter with which a State Government is concerned?
Answer: A copy of such report shall be forwarded to the State Government which shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

Question: What should a State Government do when it receives a report relating to a matter of its concern?
Answer: The State Government should forward a copy of the report to be laid before the Legislature of the State, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

Question: What powers does the Commission have while investigating?
Answer: The Commission shall have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters: summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath; requiring the discovery and production of any document; receiving evidence on affidavits; requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.

Question: What are the specific powers of a civil court that the Commission possesses during an investigation, including any additional powers determined by the President?
Answer: The Commission shall have the powers to summon and enforce the attendance of any person from any part of India and examine him on oath, require the discovery and production of any document, receive evidence on affidavits, requisition any public record or copy thereof from any court or office, issue commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents, and any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.

Question: Who should be consulted on all major policy matters affecting the socially and educationally backward classes?
Answer: The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the socially and educationally backward classes.

Question: Who shall the Union and every State Government consult on all major policy matters affecting the socially and educationally backward classes?
Answer: They should consult the Commission.

Question: What is the role of the President in relation to the Commission for the administration of Scheduled Areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The President may at any time and shall, at the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution by order appoint a Commission to report on the administration of the Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States. The order may define the composition, powers and procedure of the Commission and may contain such incidental or ancillary provisions as the President may consider necessary or desirable.

Question: When can the President appoint a Commission to report on the administration of the Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes? What can the President's order define and contain?
Answer: The President may at any time and shall, at the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution by order appoint a Commission. The order may define the composition, powers and procedure of the Commission and may contain such incidental or ancillary provisions as the President may consider necessary or desirable.

Question: What extent does the executive power of the Union have in relation to the State?
Answer: The executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to a State.

Question: What does the executive power of the Union extend to in relation to a State?
Answer: The executive power of the Union extends to the giving of directions to a State.

Question: Who can appoint a Commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to appoint a Commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes?
Answer: The President

Question: What is the purpose of the Commission appointed by the President?
Answer: To investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of India, the difficulties under which they labour, and to make recommendations as to the steps that should be taken to remove such difficulties and to improve their condition.

Question: Who is responsible for investigating the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes in India, understanding their difficulties, and making recommendations for their improvement?
Answer: The Commission appointed by the President is responsible for this.

Question: What should the Commission do after their investigation?
Answer: The Commission should present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them and making such recommendations as they think proper.

Question: Who should the Commission present a report to after their investigation and what should the report include?
Answer: The Commission should present a report to the President after their investigation, setting out the facts as found by them and making such recommendations as they think proper.

Question: What happens after the President receives the report from the Commission?
Answer: The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together with a memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: What is the President's responsibility once he receives a report from the Commission?
Answer: The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together with a memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: Who has the authority to specify the castes, races or tribes that shall be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to a State or Union territory?
Answer: The President

Question: Who is responsible for specifying the castes, races or tribes that shall be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to a State or Union territory?
Answer: The President

Question: Who can include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who has the power to include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who can specify the tribes or tribal communities to be deemed as Scheduled Tribes in a State or Union territory?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to deem tribes or tribal communities as Scheduled Tribes in a State or Union territory?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to include or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: Parliament

Question: What body has the power to include or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Can a notification issued under clause (1) for Scheduled Tribes be varied by any subsequent notification?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible to change a notification issued under clause (1) for Scheduled Tribes with any subsequent notification?
Answer: No

Question: Who can specify the socially and educationally backward classes in a State or Union territory?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to specify the socially and educationally backward classes in a State or Union territory?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to include or exclude from the Central List of socially and educationally backward classes?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Who has the power to determine the Central List of socially and educationally backward classes?
Answer: Parliament

Question: Can a notification issued under clause (1) for socially and educationally backward classes be varied by any subsequent notification?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible to vary a notification issued under clause (1) for socially and educationally backward classes by any subsequent notification?
Answer: No

Question: What is the official language of the Union according to Section 343?
Answer: Hindi in Devanagari script

Question: In what script is Hindi, the official language of the Union according to Section 343, written?
Answer: Devanagari script

Question: What form of numerals is to be used for the official purposes of the Union?
Answer: The international form of Indian numerals

Question: What is the official numeral form used for the purposes of the Union?
Answer: The international form of Indian numerals

Question: For how long from the commencement of this Constitution shall the English language continue to be used for official purposes of the Union?
Answer: Fifteen years

Question: How many years after the commencement of the Constitution was the English language used for the official purposes of the Union?
Answer: Fifteen years

Question: Who can authorise the use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language for official purposes?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to authorize the use of Hindi in addition to English for official purposes?
Answer: The President

Question: What can the Parliament provide for after fifteen years?
Answer: Provide for the use of the English language, or the Devanagari form of numerals, for such purposes as may be specified in the law.

Question: What can be provided for the use of the English language, or the Devanagari form of numerals, for such purposes as may be specified in the law after fifteen years?
Answer: The Parliament can provide for this.

Question: When shall the President constitute a Commission on official language?
Answer: At the expiration of five years from the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such commencement

Question: What happens at the expiration of five years from the commencement of the Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such commencement?
Answer: The President shall constitute a Commission on official language

Question: What is the duty of the Commission?
Answer: To make recommendations to the President on matters such as the progressive use of the Hindi language for official purposes, restrictions on the use of the English language, the language to be used for certain purposes, the form of numerals to be used for certain purposes, and any other matter referred to the Commission regarding the official language of the Union and the language for communication between the Union and a State or between one State and another and their use.

Question: What matters does the Commission make recommendations to the President on regarding the official language of the Union and communication between the Union and a State or between one State and another?
Answer: The Commission makes recommendations on the progressive use of the Hindi language for official purposes, restrictions on the use of the English language, the language to be used for certain purposes, the form of numerals to be used for certain purposes, and any other matter referred to the Commission.

Question: What is the composition of the Committee constituted under clause (4)?
Answer: The Committee consists of thirty members, of whom twenty are members of the House of the People and ten are members of the Council of States. They are elected respectively by the members of the House of the People and the members of the Council of States in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

Question: How are the members of the Committee, constituted under clause (4), elected and what houses do they belong to?
Answer: The Committee members are elected by the members of the House of the People and the members of the Council of States. Out of thirty members, twenty are from the House of the People and ten are from the Council of States. The election process follows the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

Question: What is the duty of the Committee constituted under clause (4)?
Answer: It is the duty of the Committee to examine the recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1) and to report to the President their opinion thereon.

Question: Who does the Committee constituted under clause (4) report their opinions to after examining the recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1)?
Answer: The Committee reports their opinions to the President.

Question: Can the President issue directions in accordance with the report referred to in clause (5)?
Answer: Yes, notwithstanding anything in article 343, the President may, after consideration of the report referred to in clause (5), issue directions in accordance with the whole or any part of that report.

Question: Under which circumstances can the President issue directions in accordance with the whole or any part of the report referred to in clause (5)?
Answer: Notwithstanding anything in article 343, the President can issue directions in accordance with the whole or any part of the report referred to in clause (5) after consideration of the report.

Question: What does article 345 state about the official language or languages of a State?
Answer: Article 345 states that subject to the provisions of articles 346 and 347, the Legislature of a State may adopt any one or more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the language or languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of that State. However, until the Legislature of the State provides otherwise by law, the English language shall continue to be used for those official purposes within the State for which it was being used immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What happens if a state in India does not specify an official language as per the constitution?
Answer: Article 345 states that until the Legislature of the State provides otherwise by law, the English language shall continue to be used for those official purposes within the State for which it was being used immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What is the official language for communication between one State and another or between a State and the Union as per article 346?
Answer: Article 346 states that the language for the time being authorised for use in the Union for official purposes shall be the official language for communication between one State and another State and between a State and the Union.

Question: What does Article 346 state about the official language for communication between States and between a State and the Union?
Answer: Article 346 states that the language for the time being authorised for use in the Union for official purposes shall be the official language for communication between one State and another State and between a State and the Union.

Question: What provision is there for Hindi to be the official language for communication between two or more States?
Answer: If two or more States agree that the Hindi language should be the official language for communication between such States, then Hindi can be the official language for communication between those States.

Question: Under what circumstances can Hindi be the official language for communication between two or more States?
Answer: If two or more States agree that the Hindi language should be the official language for communication between such States, then Hindi can be the official language for communication between those States.

Question: What can the President do if a substantial proportion of the population of a state desires the use of any language spoken by them to be recognised by that state?
Answer: The President may direct that such language shall also be officially recognised throughout that State or any part thereof for such purpose as he may specify.

Question: What action can the President take if a language spoken by a significant portion of a state's population wishes to have their language officially recognised?
Answer: The President may direct that such language shall also be officially recognised throughout that State or any part thereof for such purpose as he may specify.

Question: What language shall all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court be in?
Answer: The English language.

Question: In which language are all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court conducted?
Answer: The English language.

Question: Can the Governor of a State authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court?
Answer: Yes, the Governor of a State may, with the previous consent of the President, authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court.

Question: Can the Governor of a State authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court without the previous consent of the President?
Answer: No, the Governor of a State may not authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court without the previous consent of the President.

Question: What are the conditions where the Legislature of a State has prescribed any language other than the English language for use in Bills?
Answer: The conditions are not specified in the provided text.

Question: Are the conditions specified in the text for when the Legislature of a State has prescribed any language other than English for use in Bills?
Answer: No, the conditions are not specified in the provided text.

Question: What is the authoritative text of laws in the English language according to the excerpt?
Answer: A translation of the law in the English language published under the authority of the Governor of the State in the Official Gazette of that State.

Question: Where is the translation of the law in the English language published under the authority of the Governor of the State according to the excerpt?
Answer: In the Official Gazette of that State.

Question: What is the special procedure for the enactment of laws relating to language according to the text?
Answer: During the period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, no Bill or amendment making provision for the language to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in clause (1) of article 348 shall be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament without the previous sanction of the President, and the President shall not give his sanction to the introduction of any such Bill or the moving of any such amendment except after he has taken into consideration the recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1) of article 344 and the report of the Committee constituted under clause (4) of that article.

Question: What are the conditions for introducing or moving a Bill or amendment related to language in either House of Parliament during the first fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution, according to the text?
Answer: During the first fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution, no Bill or amendment related to language can be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament without the previous sanction of the President. Furthermore, the President can only give his sanction for the introduction of such a Bill or the moving of such an amendment after he has taken into consideration the recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1) of article 344 and the report of the Committee constituted under clause (4) of that article.

Question: What language can a person use to submit a representation for the redress of any grievance according to the excerpt?
Answer: Any of the languages used in the Union or in the State, as the case may be.

Question: What languages are acceptable for a person to submit a representation for the redress of any grievance, according to the excerpt?
Answer: Any of the languages used in the Union or in the State, as the case may be.

Question: What is the provision for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage of education according to the excerpt?
Answer: Every State and every local authority within the State should provide adequate facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups; and the President may issue such directions to any State as he considers necessary or proper for securing the provision of such facilities.

Question: Who is responsible for providing facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups, and who can issue directions to ensure this provision?
Answer: Every State and every local authority within the State is responsible for providing these facilities, and the President may issue such directions to any State as he considers necessary or proper for securing the provision of such facilities.

Question: What does article 350B pertain to according to the excerpt?
Answer: Special Officer for linguistic minorities.

Question: According to the excerpt, which article pertains to the Special Officer for linguistic minorities?
Answer: Article 350B

Question: Who appoints the Special Officer for linguistic minorities?
Answer: The President.

Question: Who is responsible for appointing the Special Officer for linguistic minorities?
Answer: The President.

Question: What is the duty of the Special Officer for linguistic minorities?
Answer: To investigate all matters relating to the safeguards provided for linguistic minorities under the Constitution and report to the President upon those matters at such intervals as the President may direct.

Question: Who is responsible for investigating all matters relating to the safeguards provided for linguistic minorities under the Constitution and reporting to the President?
Answer: The Special Officer for linguistic minorities

Question: What does the President do with the reports from the Special Officer for linguistic minorities?
Answer: The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament, and sent to the Governments of the States concerned.

Question: Where are the reports from the Special Officer for linguistic minorities sent by the President?
Answer: The President sends the reports to each House of Parliament and to the Governments of the States concerned.

Question: What is the duty of the Union regarding the Hindi language?
Answer: To promote the spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of the composite culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating without interfering with its genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani and in the other languages of India specified in the Eighth Schedule.

Question: What are the ways in which the Union is supposed to promote and develop the Hindi language?
Answer: The Union is supposed to promote the spread of the Hindi language, develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of the composite culture of India, and to secure its enrichment by assimilating, without interfering with its genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani and in the other languages of India specified in the Eighth Schedule.

Question: What can the President declare during a grave emergency?
Answer: The President may, by Proclamation, declare that the security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or armed rebellion.

Question: What can the President proclaim when the security of India or any part of its territory is threatened by war, external aggression, or armed rebellion?
Answer: During a grave emergency, the President can declare that the security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened.

Question: When can a Proclamation of Emergency be made?
Answer: A Proclamation of Emergency may be made before the actual occurrence of war or of any such aggression or rebellion, if the President is satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof.

Question: Under what circumstances may the President issue a Proclamation of Emergency?
Answer: The President may issue a Proclamation of Emergency before the actual occurrence of war or of any such aggression or rebellion, if he/she is satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof.

Question: Can a Proclamation issued under clause (1) be varied or revoked?
Answer: Yes, a Proclamation issued under clause (1) may be varied or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation.

Question: How can a Proclamation issued under clause (1) be varied or revoked?
Answer: A Proclamation issued under clause (1) may be varied or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation.

Question: Who needs to communicate the decision of issuing a Proclamation in writing to the President?
Answer: The Union Cabinet, which is the Council consisting of the Prime Minister and other Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75.

Question: Who consists of the Union Cabinet that communicates the decision of issuing a Proclamation in writing to the President?
Answer: The Union Cabinet consists of the Prime Minister and other Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75.

Question: Where should every Proclamation issued under this article be laid?
Answer: Before each House of Parliament.

Question: Where should Proclamations issued under a certain article be laid?
Answer: Before each House of Parliament.

Question: When does a Proclamation cease to operate?
Answer: At the expiration of one month unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament.

Question: What is necessary for a Proclamation to operate beyond the expiration of one month?
Answer: It must be approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament before the expiration of that period.

Question: What happens to a Proclamation if the House of the People has been dissolved?
Answer: The Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.

Question: When does a Proclamation cease to operate after the House of the People has been reconstituted and no resolution has been passed to approve the Proclamation?
Answer: The Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution.

Question: Until when shall a Proclamation approved under clause (4) operate?
Answer: A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation under clause (4).

Question: What happens to a Proclamation approved under clause (4) after a period of six months from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving it?
Answer: A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate.

Question: When does a Proclamation continue in force?
Answer: If and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further period.

Question: Under what conditions will a Proclamation continue in force for a further period?
Answer: A Proclamation will continue in force for a further period if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament, unless it's revoked.

Question: What happens if the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during any such period of six months?
Answer: If the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during any such period of six months and a resolution approving the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution.

Question: What is the consequence if a resolution approving the continuance in force of a Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States, but not by the House of the People during a six month period, and the House of the People is dissolved within this period?
Answer: If this scenario happens, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution.

Question: What is required for a resolution to be passed by either House of Parliament?
Answer: For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolution may be passed by either House of Parliament only by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members of that House present and voting.

Question: What is the majority requirement in clauses (4) and (5) to pass a resolution in either House of Parliament?
Answer: A resolution can be passed by either House of Parliament only by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members of that House present and voting.

Question: What will the President do if the House of the People passes a resolution disapproving a Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation?
Answer: The President shall revoke a Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation if the House of the People passes a resolution disapproving, or, as the case may be, disapproving the continuance in force of, such Proclamation.

Question: What will the President do if the House of the People passes a resolution disapproving, or, as the case may be, disapproving the continuance in force of, a Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation?
Answer: The President shall revoke a Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation.

Question: What happens if a notice in writing signed by not less than one-tenth of the total number of members of the House of the People is given, of their intention to move a resolution for disapproving a Proclamation?
Answer: A special sitting of the House shall be held within fourteen days from the date on which such notice is received by the Speaker, or, as the case may be, by the President if the House is not in session.

Question: When is a special sitting of the House held after a notice in writing signed by not less than one-tenth of the total number of members of the House of the People is given, of their intention to move a resolution for disapproving a Proclamation?
Answer: A special sitting of the House is held within fourteen days from the date on which such notice is received by the Speaker, or, as the case may be, by the President if the House is not in session.

Question: What power does the President have according to this article of the Constitution of India?
Answer: The power to issue different Proclamations on different grounds, being war or external aggression or armed rebellion or imminent danger of war or external aggression or armed rebellion, whether or not there is a Proclamation already issued by the President under clause (1) and such Proclamation is in operation.

Question: What is the specific power granted to the President under the Constitution of India that allows them to issue different Proclamations on different grounds, such as war or external aggression or armed rebellion or imminent danger of war or external aggression or armed rebellion, even if there is already a Proclamation in operation?
Answer: This article of the Constitution of India grants the President the power to issue different Proclamations on different grounds, being war or external aggression or armed rebellion or imminent danger of war or external aggression or armed rebellion, whether or not there is a Proclamation already issued by the President under clause (1) and such Proclamation is in operation.

Question: What is the effect of a Proclamation of Emergency according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the executive power of the Union extends to giving directions to any State as to the manner in which the executive power thereof is to be exercised. The power of Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter includes power to make laws conferring powers and imposing duties upon the Union or officers and authorities of the Union as respects that matter.

Question: What powers does the Union and Parliament have during a Proclamation of Emergency according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: During a Proclamation of Emergency, the executive power of the Union extends to giving directions to any State as to the manner in which the executive power thereof is to be exercised. Additionally, the power of Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter includes power to make laws conferring powers and imposing duties upon the Union or officers and authorities of the Union as respects that matter.

Question: What happens when a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only in any part of the territory of India?
Answer: The executive power of the Union to give directions and the power of Parliament to make laws extend to any State other than a State in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation if the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: What powers does the Union and Parliament gain in parts of India not under a Proclamation of Emergency when a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation in any part of the territory of India and the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation?
Answer: The executive power of the Union to give directions and the power of Parliament to make laws extend to any State other than a State in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: What power does the President have while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation according to section 354?
Answer: The President may, by order, direct that all or any of the provisions of articles related to the distribution of revenues apply while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: What may the President do with the provisions of articles related to the distribution of revenues during a Proclamation of Emergency according to section 354?
Answer: The President may, by order, direct that all or any of the provisions of articles related to the distribution of revenues apply while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: What is the duty of the Union according to Article 355 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: It is the duty of the Union to protect every State against external aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure that the Government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

Question: Which article of the Indian Constitution outlines the Union's duty to protect every State against external aggression and internal disturbance, and to ensure that the Government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution?
Answer: Article 355 of the Indian Constitution outlines this duty.

Question: What can the President do if he is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the Government of a State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The President may by Proclamation assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Government of the State and all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Governor or any body or authority in the State other than the Legislature of the State. He may also declare that the powers of the Legislature of the State shall be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. Additionally, he can make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the objects of the Proclamation.

Question: What powers does the President of India have if a situation arises where the government of a state cannot function in accordance with the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The President may by Proclamation assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Government of the State and all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Governor or any body or authority in the State other than the Legislature of the State. He may also declare that the powers of the Legislature of the State shall be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. Additionally, he can make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the objects of the Proclamation.

Question: What are the limitations of the President's powers in case of failure of constitutional machinery in States?
Answer: Nothing in this clause shall authorise the President to assume to himself any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High Court, or to suspend in whole or in part the operation of any provision of this Constitution relating to any body or authority in the State.

Question: What powers are not allowed for the President to assume during a failure of constitutional machinery in States?
Answer: The President is not authorised to assume any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High Court, or to suspend in whole or in part the operation of any provision of the Constitution relating to any body or authority in the State.

Question: What should be done with every order made under clause (1) according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: Where should every order made under clause (1) be laid according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: Every order made under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: When should a Proclamation under the article be laid before each House of Parliament?
Answer: Every Proclamation under this article should be laid before each House of Parliament immediately after it is issued.

Question: When should every Proclamation under this article be laid before each House of Parliament?
Answer: Immediately after it is issued.

Question: What happens if a Proclamation is not approved by both Houses of Parliament within two months?
Answer: If a Proclamation is not approved by both Houses of Parliament within two months, it ceases to operate.

Question: What occurs when a Proclamation fails to receive approval from both Houses of Parliament within the span of two months?
Answer: It ceases to operate.

Question: What happens if a Proclamation is issued when the House of the People is dissolved?
Answer: If a Proclamation is issued when the House of the People is dissolved, and it has been approved by the Council of States, but not by the House of the People within the two month period, the Proclamation ceases to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution, unless the Proclamation is approved by the House of the People within that period.

Question: What happens to a Proclamation that has been approved by the Council of States, but not by the House of the People within the two month period, if the House of the People is dissolved and then reconstituted?
Answer: The Proclamation ceases to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution, unless the Proclamation is approved by the House of the People within that period.

Question: When does a Proclamation cease to operate if it is approved?
Answer: A Proclamation that is approved ceases to operate on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of issue of the Proclamation, unless it is revoked or a resolution approving its continuance is passed by both Houses of Parliament.

Question: What happens to an approved Proclamation after six months from the date of issue, unless it is revoked or a resolution approving its continuance is passed by both Houses of Parliament?
Answer: An approved Proclamation ceases to operate.

Question: What is the maximum duration a Proclamation can remain in force?
Answer: No Proclamation can remain in force for more than three years.

Question: For how long can a Proclamation remain in force at most?
Answer: A Proclamation can remain in force for no more than three years.

Question: What happens if a resolution for the continuance of a Proclamation is not passed by the House of the People?
Answer: The Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution.

Question: When does the Proclamation cease to operate if a resolution for its continuance is not passed by the House of the People after its reconstitution?
Answer: The Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution.

Question: What is the exception for the Proclamation issued on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab?
Answer: The reference in the first proviso to 'three years' shall be construed as a reference to five years.

Question: How is 'three years' in the first proviso of the Proclamation issued on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab to be construed?
Answer: The reference in the first proviso to 'three years' shall be construed as a reference to five years.

Question: Under what conditions can a resolution for the continuance in force of a Proclamation be passed for any period beyond the expiration of one year?
Answer: A resolution can be passed if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, in the whole of India or, as the case may be, in the whole or any part of the State, at the time of the passing of such resolution, and the Election Commission certifies that the continuance in force of the Proclamation approved under clause (3) during the period specified in such resolution is necessary on account of difficulties in holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.

Question: What is required for a resolution to be passed for the continuance in force of a Proclamation beyond the expiration of one year, particularly in relation to the operation of a Proclamation of Emergency and the certification from the Election Commission?
Answer: For a resolution to be passed for the continuance in force of a Proclamation beyond the expiration of one year, a Proclamation of Emergency must be in operation in the whole of India or, as the case may be, in the whole or any part of the State at the time of the passing of such resolution. Additionally, the Election Commission must certify that the continuance in force of the Proclamation approved under clause (3) during the period specified in such resolution is necessary due to difficulties in holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.

Question: Does clause (5) apply to the Proclamation issued on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab?
Answer: No, nothing in this clause shall apply to the Proclamation issued on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab.

Question: Does anything in clause (5) apply to the Proclamation issued on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab?
Answer: No

Question: Who can the Parliament confer the power of the Legislature of the State to make laws to?
Answer: The Parliament can confer this power to the President.

Question: Who can the Parliament confer the power to make laws for the Legislature of the State?
Answer: The President

Question: Can the President delegate the power conferred to him?
Answer: Yes, the President can delegate the power conferred to him, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose.

Question: Is it possible for the President to impose conditions on the power he delegates?
Answer: Yes, the President can impose such conditions as he may think fit on the power he delegates.

Question: Who can the President specify to have the delegated power?
Answer: The President can specify any other authority to have the delegated power.

Question: Who can have the delegated power as specified by the President?
Answer: Any other authority can have the delegated power as specified by the President.

Question: What can the President authorize when the House of the People is not in session?
Answer: The President can authorize expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State pending the sanction of such expenditure by Parliament.

Question: From where can the President authorize expenditure when the House of the People is not in session, pending the sanction of such expenditure by Parliament?
Answer: The President can authorize expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State.

Question: What happens to a law made in exercise of the power of the Legislature of the State by Parliament or the President or other authority after the Proclamation has ceased to operate?
Answer: The law continues in force until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other authority.

Question: What is the status of a law made by the Legislature of the State, Parliament, President, or other authority after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, and until it is altered, repealed, or amended by a competent authority?
Answer: The law continues in force.

Question: What does article 358 state?
Answer: Article 358 states that during emergencies when a Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by external aggression is in operation, nothing in article 19 shall restrict the power of the State to make any law or to take any executive action. Any law so made shall cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate.

Question: What happens to laws made under the provisions of Article 358 when the Proclamation of Emergency ceases to operate?
Answer: Any law made under the provisions of Article 358 shall cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation of Emergency ceases to operate.

Question: What happens when a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation?
Answer: When a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, any law may be made, or any executive action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: What actions can be taken under the article when a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, and where can these actions be taken?
Answer: When a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, any law may be made, or any executive action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: What does not apply according to clause 1?
Answer: Clause 1 does not apply to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.

Question: To what does Clause 1 not apply?
Answer: Clause 1 does not apply to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.

Question: What can the President do during the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III during emergencies?
Answer: During the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III during emergencies, the President may declare that the right to move any court for the enforcement of such of the rights as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the rights so mentioned shall remain suspended for the period during which the Proclamation is in force or for such shorter period as may be specified in the order.

Question: What power does the President have regarding the enforcement of rights mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court during the period during which the Proclamation is in force or for such shorter period as may be specified in the order?
Answer: During the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III during emergencies, the President can declare that the right to move any court for the enforcement of such of the rights as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the rights so mentioned shall remain suspended.

Question: What happens while an order made under clause 1 mentioning any of the rights conferred by Part III is in operation?
Answer: While an order made under clause 1 mentioning any of the rights conferred by Part III is in operation, nothing in that Part conferring those rights shall restrict the power of the State as defined in the said Part to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect.

Question: What happens when the State, as mentioned in Part III, makes a law or takes an executive action under the operation of an order made under clause 1, which mentions any of the rights conferred by Part III?
Answer: While an order made under clause 1 mentioning any of the rights conferred by Part III is in operation, nothing in that Part conferring those rights shall restrict the power of the State as defined in the said Part to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect.

Question: What happens when the order ceases to operate?
Answer: Except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect.

Question: What is the consequence of things done or omitted to be done before a law ceases to have effect?
Answer: When the order ceases to operate, those things are excepted.

Question: What is the condition for a law to be made or any executive action to be taken under this article?
Answer: It can be made if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: Under what circumstances can a law be made or an executive action be taken when the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation in a part of the territory of India?
Answer: A law can be made or an executive action can be taken if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India where the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: What does clause (1A) not apply to?
Answer: It does not apply to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.

Question: What are the conditions under which clause (1A) does not apply?
Answer: Clause (1A) does not apply to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.

Question: To what extent can an order extend?
Answer: An order may extend to the whole or any part of the territory of India.

Question: Where may an order extend in India?
Answer: An order may extend to the whole or any part of the territory of India.

Question: What does the President consider for extending the order?
Answer: The President considers such extension to be necessary if the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: Under what circumstances does the President find it necessary to extend the Proclamation of Emergency?
Answer: The President considers such extension to be necessary if the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

Question: What is the requirement for every order made under clause (1)?
Answer: Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: Where should every order made under clause (1) be laid as soon as it is made?
Answer: Every order made under clause (1) should be laid before each House of Parliament.

Question: What is mentioned about the application of this Part to the State of Punjab?
Answer: It was repealed by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-1-1990).

Question: Which Act repealed the application of this Part to the State of Punjab and when did it come into effect?
Answer: The Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 3 repealed it, coming into effect on 6-1-1990.

Question: Under what condition can a financial emergency be proclaimed?
Answer: If the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened.

Question: What does it mean when the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened?
Answer: It means a financial emergency can be proclaimed.

Question: Who can issue a Proclamation according to clause (1)?
Answer: The President

Question: According to clause (1), who has the authority to issue a Proclamation?
Answer: The President

Question: How can a Proclamation issued under clause (1) be revoked or altered?
Answer: By a subsequent Proclamation

Question: What is the method to revoke or alter a Proclamation issued under clause (1)?
Answer: By a subsequent Proclamation

Question: What happens to a Proclamation if it has not been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament within two months?
Answer: It shall cease to operate

Question: What occurs if a Proclamation has not been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament within two months?
Answer: It shall cease to operate

Question: What happens to a Proclamation issued when the House of the People has been dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during the period of two months?
Answer: The Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.

Question: When does a Proclamation cease to operate if the House of the People has been dissolved and then reconstituted?
Answer: The Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.

Question: During the period any such Proclamation as is mentioned in clause (1) is in operation, who has the executive authority?
Answer: The Union

Question: Who has the executive authority during the period any Proclamation as mentioned in clause (1) is in operation?
Answer: The Union

Question: What type of directions can the Union give to any State during the operation of a Proclamation?
Answer: Directions to observe such canons of financial propriety as may be specified in the directions, and to the giving of such other directions as the President may deem necessary and adequate for the purpose.

Question: What does the President specify in the directions given to a State during the operation of a Proclamation by the Union?
Answer: The President specifies the observance of certain canons of financial propriety and any other directions deemed necessary and adequate for the purpose.

Question: What provisions can be included in the directions given by the Union to a State during the operation of a Proclamation?
Answer: A provision requiring the reduction of salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons serving in connection with the affairs of a State, and a provision requiring all Money Bills or other Bills to be reserved for the consideration of the President.

Question: What does the provision requiring the reduction of salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons serving in connection with the affairs of a State, and the provision requiring all Money Bills or other Bills to be reserved for the consideration of the President pertain to in the Indian constitution?
Answer: These provisions can be included in the directions given by the Union to a State during the operation of a Proclamation.

Question: Who can issue directions for the reduction of salaries and allowances during the period any Proclamation is in operation?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to issue directions for the reduction of salaries and allowances during the period any Proclamation is in operation?
Answer: The President

Question: Who shall not be answerable to any court for the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of his office?
Answer: The President, or the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State

Question: What is the immunity provided to the President, or the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State in relation to the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of their office?
Answer: They shall not be answerable to any court for the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of their office

Question: Can the conduct of the President be brought under review by any court, tribunal or body?
Answer: Yes, the conduct of the President may be brought under review by any court, tribunal or body appointed or designated by either House of Parliament for the investigation of a charge under article 61.

Question: Who has the authority to appoint or designate a court, tribunal, or body to review the conduct of the President under Article 61?
Answer: Either House of Parliament has the authority to appoint or designate a court, tribunal, or body to review the conduct of the President under Article 61.

Question: Can criminal proceedings be instituted or continued against the President, or the Governor of a State, during their term of office?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible to institute or continue criminal proceedings against the President, or the Governor of a State, during their term of office?
Answer: No

Question: Can civil proceedings be instituted during the President's or Governor's term of office in any court in respect of any act done by him in his personal capacity?
Answer: No, not until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been delivered to the President or the Governor, or left at his office stating the nature of the proceedings.

Question: When can civil proceedings be instituted against the President or Governor in respect of any act done by him in his personal capacity?
Answer: Civil proceedings can be instituted after the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been delivered to the President or the Governor, or left at his office stating the nature of the proceedings.

Question: Can the President or the Governor of a State be arrested or imprisoned during his term of office?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible for the President or the Governor of a State to be arrested or imprisoned during their term of office?
Answer: No

Question: What is the protection for publication of proceedings of Parliament and State Legislatures?
Answer: No person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court in respect of the publication in a newspaper of a substantially true report of any proceedings of either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature, of a State, unless the publication is proved to have been made with malice.

Question: What happens if a person publishes a substantially true report of any proceedings of the Parliament or the State Legislature in a newspaper without malice?
Answer: No person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court in respect of the publication in a newspaper of a substantially true report of any proceedings of either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature, of a State, unless the publication is proved to have been made with malice.

Question: Does the protection for publication of proceedings apply to reports broadcast by wireless telegraphy?
Answer: Yes, clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports or matters broadcast by means of wireless telegraphy as part of any programme or service provided by means of a broadcasting station.

Question: Does clause (1) apply to reports or matters broadcast by wireless telegraphy as part of any programme or service provided by a broadcasting station?
Answer: Yes, the protection for publication of proceedings does apply to these reports broadcast by wireless telegraphy.

Question: Does the protection for publication of proceedings apply to secret sittings of the House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: No, the protection does not apply to the publication of any report of the proceedings of a secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly.

Question: Does the protection apply to the publication of any report of the proceedings of a secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: No, the protection does not apply.

Question: What does 'newspaper' include in this context?
Answer: In this article, 'newspaper' includes a news agency report containing material for publication in a newspaper.

Question: What is the meaning of 'newspaper' in the context of this article?
Answer: 'Newspaper' in the context of this article refers to a news agency report containing material for publication in a newspaper.

Question: What is the disqualification for appointment on remunerative political post?
Answer: A member of a House belonging to any political party who is disqualified for being a member of the House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to hold any remunerative political post for duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member would expire or till the date on which he contests an election to a House and is declared elected, whichever is earlier.

Question: What happens to a member of a House belonging to any political party who is disqualified for being a member of the House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule?
Answer: That member is also disqualified to hold any remunerative political post for duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member would expire or till the date on which he contests an election to a House and is declared elected, whichever is earlier.

Question: What is the meaning of 'House' for the purposes of the article on disqualification for appointment on remunerative political post?
Answer: The expression 'House' has the meaning assigned to it in clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the Tenth Schedule.

Question: Where is the meaning of the term 'House' for the article on disqualification for appointment on remunerative political post assigned?
Answer: The meaning of 'House' is assigned in clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the Tenth Schedule.

Question: What does the expression 'remunerative political post' refer to?
Answer: A 'remunerative political post' refers to any office under the Government of India or the Government of a State where the salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue of the Government of India or the Government of the State. It can also refer to an office under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or partially owned by the Government of India or the Government of State, and the salary or remuneration for such office is paid by such body. This does not apply if the salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.

Question: What types of offices can be considered as 'remunerative political posts' and under what conditions are they not considered as such?
Answer: 'Remunerative political post' can be any office under the Government of India or the Government of a State where the salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue of the Government of India or the Government of the State. It can also be an office under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or partially owned by the Government of India or the Government of State, and the salary or remuneration for such office is paid by such body. However, this does not apply if the salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.

Question: What is the implication of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 on the rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States?
Answer: The Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 has repealed the rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States.

Question: What has the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 done to the rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States?
Answer: The Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 has repealed the rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States.

Question: What is the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court or any other court in relation to disputes arising out of certain treaties, agreements, etc.?
Answer: Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any provision of a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which was entered into or executed before the commencement of the Constitution by any Ruler of an Indian State and to which the Government of the Dominion of India or any of its predecessor Governments was a party and which has or has been continued in operation after such commencement.

Question: Who has jurisdiction over disputes arising from provisions of a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad, or similar instrument entered into or executed before the commencement of the Constitution by a Ruler of an Indian State to which the Government of the Dominion of India or any of its predecessor Governments was a party and which has or has been continued in operation after such commencement?
Answer: Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in any such dispute.

Question: What does 'Indian State' mean in the context of the Constitution?
Answer: 'Indian State' refers to any territory recognised before the commencement of the Constitution by His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India as being such a State.

Question: What does a territory recognised before the commencement of the Constitution by His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India as being such a State refer to?
Answer: This refers to the 'Indian State' in the context of the Constitution.

Question: Who is included in the term 'Ruler' as per the Constitution?
Answer: 'Ruler' includes the Prince, Chief or other person recognised before the commencement of the Constitution by His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India.

Question: Who were the Prince, Chief or other person recognized by His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India before the commencement of the Constitution referred to as?
Answer: They were referred to as 'Ruler' as per the Constitution.

Question: What happens to the recognition of the Rulers of Indian States according to section 363A?
Answer: According to section 363A, the Prince, Chief or other person who was recognized by the President as the Ruler of an Indian State before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, ceases to be recognized as such Ruler or the successor of such Ruler from such commencement.

Question: Who ceases to be recognized as the Ruler of an Indian State from the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971 according to section 363A?
Answer: The Prince, Chief or other person who was recognized by the President as the Ruler of an Indian State before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, ceases to be recognized as such Ruler or the successor of such Ruler from such commencement.

Question: What changes were made to the privy purses as per the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971?
Answer: With the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, privy purse was abolished. All rights, liabilities and obligations in respect of privy purse were extinguished. The Ruler or, as the case may be, the successor of such Ruler, or any other person shall not be paid any sum as privy purse.

Question: What happened to the privy purse after the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971?
Answer: The privy purse was abolished after the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971. All rights, liabilities and obligations in respect of privy purse were extinguished. No sum as privy purse was to be paid to the Ruler, their successor, or any other person.

Question: What powers does the President have regarding major ports and aerodromes according to section 364 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: According to section 364, the President may direct that any law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of a State shall not apply to any major port or aerodrome or shall apply thereto subject to exceptions or modifications. The President may also direct that any existing law shall cease to have effect in any major port or aerodrome except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the said date.

Question: What does section 364 of the Indian Constitution state about the President's ability to direct the application of laws to major ports and aerodromes?
Answer: Section 364 of the Indian Constitution states that the President may direct that any law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of a State shall not apply to any major port or aerodrome or shall apply thereto subject to exceptions or modifications. Additionally, the President may direct that any existing law shall cease to have effect in any major port or aerodrome except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the said date.

Question: What is the definition of a 'major port' according to section 364 of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: As per section 364 of the Indian Constitution, a 'major port' means a port declared to be a major port by or under any law made by Parliament or any existing law and includes all areas for the time being included within the same.

Question: According to the Indian Constitution, what criteria does a port need to meet to be declared a 'major port' under section 364?
Answer: To be declared a 'major port' under section 364 of the Indian Constitution, a port must be declared to be a major port by or under any law made by Parliament or any existing law and should include all areas for the time being included within the same.

Question: What is the definition of 'aerodrome' in this context?
Answer: Aerodrome is defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to airways, aircraft and air navigation.

Question: For what purposes is 'aerodrome' defined in the context of airways, aircraft and air navigation?
Answer: Aerodrome is defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to airways, aircraft and air navigation.

Question: What does 'agricultural income' mean in this constitution?
Answer: Agricultural income means agricultural income as defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax.

Question: In which enactments is the definition of 'agricultural income' used for the purposes of this constitution?
Answer: The definition of 'agricultural income' is used in the enactments relating to Indian income-tax.

Question: Who is referred to as 'an Anglo-Indian' in this constitution?
Answer: An Anglo-Indian means a person whose father or any of whose other male progenitors in the male line is or was of European descent but who is domiciled within the territory of India and is or was born within such territory of parents habitually resident therein and not established there for temporary purposes only.

Question: What does it mean to be a person whose father or any of whose other male progenitors in the male line is or was of European descent but who is domiciled within the territory of India and is or was born within such territory of parents habitually resident therein and not established there for temporary purposes only?
Answer: This describes 'an Anglo-Indian' in the constitution.

Question: What is the definition of 'article' in this context?
Answer: Article means an article of this Constitution.

Question: In what context does 'article' refer to an article of the Constitution?
Answer: The term 'article' refers to an article of the Constitution in this context.

Question: What is the meaning of 'borrow' in this context?
Answer: Borrow includes the raising of money by the grant of annuities, and 'loan' shall be construed accordingly.

Question: What does the term 'borrow' include in the context of finance and how should 'loan' be construed?
Answer: Borrow includes the raising of money by the grant of annuities, and 'loan' shall be construed accordingly.

Question: What does 'clause' mean in this constitution?
Answer: Clause means a clause of the article in which the expression occurs.

Question: In the context of a constitution, where does the expression 'clause' occur?
Answer: The expression 'clause' occurs in a clause of the article.

Question: What does 'corporation tax' mean in this constitution?
Answer: Corporation tax means any tax on income, so far as that tax is payable by companies and is a tax in the case of which the following conditions are fulfilled: it is not chargeable in respect of agricultural income; no deduction in respect of the tax paid by companies is, by any enactments which may apply to the tax, authorised to be made from dividends payable by the companies to individuals; and no provision exists for taking the tax.

Question: In this constitution, which tax that is payable by companies, is not chargeable in respect of agricultural income, has no deduction authorized from dividends payable to the companies to individuals, and has no provision for taking the tax?
Answer: Corporation tax

Question: What is the meaning of 'corresponding Province', 'corresponding Indian State' or 'corresponding State'?
Answer: In cases of doubt such Province, Indian State or State as may be determined by the President to be the corresponding Province, the corresponding Indian State or the corresponding State, as the case may be, for the particular purpose in question

Question: Who determines what is the 'corresponding Province', 'corresponding Indian State' or 'corresponding State' in cases of doubt?
Answer: The President determines what is the 'corresponding Province', 'corresponding Indian State' or 'corresponding State' in cases of doubt.

Question: What is included in the term 'debt'?
Answer: Any liability in respect of any obligation to repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liability under any guarantee

Question: What does a liability in respect of any obligation to repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liability under any guarantee refer to?
Answer: This refers to the term 'debt'.

Question: What does 'estate duty' refer to?
Answer: A duty to be assessed on or by reference to the principal value, ascertained in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed by or under laws made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State relating to the duty, of all property passing upon death or deemed, under the provisions of the said laws, so to pass

Question: What is the duty assessed on or by reference to the principal value of all property passing upon death or deemed to pass under the provisions of laws made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State?
Answer: This is referred to as 'estate duty'.

Question: What is the definition of 'existing law'?
Answer: Any law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation passed or made before the commencement of this Constitution by any Legislature, authority or person having power to make such a law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation

Question: What entities can pass or make an 'existing law' before the commencement of a Constitution?
Answer: Any Legislature, authority or person having power to make such a law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation

Question: What does the term 'Federal Court' refer to?
Answer: The Federal Court constituted under the Government of India Act, 1935

Question: Under which act was the Federal Court constituted?
Answer: The Federal Court was constituted under the Government of India Act, 1935

Question: What is included in the term 'goods'?
Answer: All materials, commodities, and articles

Question: What does the term for 'all materials, commodities, and articles' refer to?
Answer: The term for 'all materials, commodities, and articles' refers to 'goods'.

Question: What is 'goods and services tax'?
Answer: Any tax on supply of goods, or services or both except taxes on the supply of the alcoholic liquor for human consumption

Question: What is a tax on the supply of goods, or services or both except taxes on the supply of the alcoholic liquor for human consumption called?
Answer: Goods and Services Tax

Question: What does 'guarantee' include?
Answer: Any obligation undertaken before the commencement of this Constitution to make payments in the event of the profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified amount

Question: What term refers to any obligation undertaken before the commencement of a constitution to make payments in the event of the profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified amount?
Answer: Guarantee

Question: What does 'High Court' refer to?
Answer: Any Court which is deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to be a High Court

Question: What is a court that is deemed for the purposes of a Constitution referred to as?
Answer: High Court

Question: What is the definition of a 'High Court' in this context?
Answer: A 'High Court' refers to any Court in the territory of India constituted or reconstituted under this Constitution as a High Court, and any other Court in the territory of India which may be declared by Parliament by law to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes of this Constitution.

Question: Which courts are referred to as 'High Courts' under the Indian Constitution?
Answer: A 'High Court' refers to any Court in the territory of India constituted or reconstituted under this Constitution as a High Court, and any other Court in the territory of India which may be declared by Parliament by law to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes of this Constitution.

Question: What does 'Indian State' mean?
Answer: An 'Indian State' means any territory which the Government of the Dominion of India recognised as such a State.

Question: Which entity recognises a territory as an 'Indian State'?
Answer: The Government of the Dominion of India recognises a territory as an 'Indian State'.

Question: What does 'Part' refer to?
Answer: A 'Part' refers to a Part of this Constitution.

Question: What is a 'Part' in the context of the Constitution?
Answer: A 'Part' refers to a Part of this Constitution.

Question: What is the definition of a 'pension' in this context?
Answer: A 'pension' means a pension, whether contributory or not, of any kind whatsoever payable to or in respect of any person, and includes retired pay so payable; a gratuity so payable and any sum or sums so payable by way of the return, with or without interest thereon or any other addition thereto, of subscriptions to a provident fund.

Question: What does a 'pension' include, whether it's contributory or not?
Answer: A 'pension' includes any kind of pension payable to or in respect of any person, retired pay so payable, a gratuity so payable, and any sum or sums payable by way of the return, with or without interest thereon or any other addition thereto, of subscriptions to a provident fund.

Question: What does 'Proclamation of Emergency' refer to?
Answer: A 'Proclamation of Emergency' refers to a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 352.

Question: Under which clause and article is a 'Proclamation of Emergency' issued?
Answer: A 'Proclamation of Emergency' is issued under clause (1) of article 352.

Question: What is a 'public notification'?
Answer: A 'public notification' means a notification in the Gazette of India, or, as the case may be, the Official Gazette of a State.

Question: What does it mean when a notification is in the Gazette of India or the Official Gazette of a State?
Answer: When a notification is in the Gazette of India or the Official Gazette of a State, it is referred to as a 'public notification'.

Question: What is the definition of a 'railway'?
Answer: A 'railway' does not include a tramway wholly within a municipal area, or any other line of communication wholly situate in one State and declared by Parliament by law not to be a railway.

Question: What does the term 'railway' not include according to Parliament law?
Answer: A 'railway' does not include a tramway wholly within a municipal area, or any other line of communication wholly situate in one State and declared by Parliament by law not to be a railway.

Question: What does 'Ruler' mean in this context?
Answer: A 'Ruler' means the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler of an Indian State or any person who, at any time before such commencement, was recognised by the President as the successor of such Ruler.

Question: Who is recognized by the President as the Ruler of an Indian State before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971?
Answer: The Prince, Chief or other person who, at any time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler of an Indian State is referred to as 'Ruler' in this context.

Question: What does 'Schedule' mean?
Answer: A 'Schedule' means a Schedule to this Constitution.

Question: What does a Schedule to this Constitution refer to?
Answer: A Schedule to this Constitution refers to a 'Schedule'.

Question: What are 'Scheduled Castes'?
Answer: Scheduled Castes' means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this Constitution.

Question: Which article deems certain castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of the Constitution?
Answer: Article 341

Question: What are 'Scheduled Tribes'?
Answer: Scheduled Tribes' means such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities.

Question: What is the term for such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities?
Answer: The term for such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities is 'Scheduled Tribes'.

Question: What does the term 'Scheduled Tribes' refer to as per article 342 of the constitution?
Answer: Scheduled Tribes are those that are deemed under article 342 for the purposes of the Constitution.

Question: Under which article of the Constitution are the Scheduled Tribes deemed for its purposes?
Answer: The Scheduled Tribes are deemed under article 342 of the Constitution for its purposes.

Question: What does 'securities' include according to the constitutional definition?
Answer: 'Securities' includes stock.

Question: What is included in the term 'securities' according to the constitutional definition?
Answer: Stock is included in the term 'securities'.

Question: What is the definition of 'Services' in the constitution?
Answer: 'Services' means anything other than goods.

Question: What does the term 'Services' defined as anything other than goods refer to in a legal context?
Answer: In the constitution, 'Services' is defined as anything other than goods.

Question: What does the term 'State' refer to in articles 246A, 268, 269, 269A and article 279A?
Answer: 'State' with reference to these articles includes a Union territory with Legislature.

Question: Which territories does the term 'State' include in the context of articles 246A, 268, 269, 269A and article 279A?
Answer: The term 'State' includes a Union territory with Legislature.

Question: What does 'socially and educationally backward classes' mean as per the constitution?
Answer: It means such backward classes as are so deemed under article 342A for the purposes of this Constitution.

Question: Which article of the constitution deems certain classes as 'socially and educationally backward' for the purposes of the Constitution?
Answer: Article 342A of the Constitution deems certain classes as 'socially and educationally backward'.

Question: What is the meaning of 'sub-clause' in the constitution?
Answer: 'Sub-clause' means a sub-clause of the clause in which the expression occurs.

Question: What does 'sub-clause' refer to when used in a clause?
Answer: 'Sub-clause' refers to a sub-clause of the clause in which the expression occurs.

Question: What is included in the term 'taxation' as per the constitution?
Answer: 'Taxation' includes the imposition of any tax or impost, whether general or local or special, and 'tax' shall be construed accordingly.

Question: What does the term 'taxation' include according to its constitutional definition?
Answer: 'Taxation' includes the imposition of any tax or impost, whether general or local or special, and 'tax' shall be construed accordingly.

Question: What does 'tax on income' include?
Answer: 'Tax on income' includes a tax in the nature of an excess profits tax.

Question: What is an example of a tax that 'tax on income' might include?
Answer: An example of a tax that 'tax on income' might include is a tax in the nature of an excess profits tax.

Question: What is included in 'tax on the sale or purchase of goods'?
Answer: It includes a tax on the transfer of property in goods for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, a tax on the delivery of goods on hire-purchase or any system of payment by installments, a tax on the transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, a tax on the supply of goods by any unincorporated association or body of persons to a member thereof for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, a tax on the supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink, where such supply or service, is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration. Such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person making the transfer.

Question: What does the tax on the transfer of property in goods for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, a tax on the delivery of goods on hire-purchase or any system of payment by installments, a tax on the transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, a tax on the supply of goods by any unincorporated association or body of persons to a member thereof for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, a tax on the supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink, where such supply or service, is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, refer to?
Answer: It refers to 'tax on the sale or purchase of goods'. Such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person making the transfer.

Question: What does 'Union territory' refer to?
Answer: Any Union territory specified in the First Schedule and includes any other territory comprised within the territory of India but not specified in that Schedule.

Question: What is included in the term 'Union territory' according to the First Schedule in the territory of India?
Answer: Any Union territory specified in the First Schedule and includes any other territory comprised within the territory of India but not specified in that Schedule.

Question: What document is used for the interpretation of the Constitution?
Answer: The General Clauses Act, 1897.

Question: What is the purpose of The General Clauses Act, 1897?
Answer: It is used for the interpretation of the Constitution.

Question: What does the term 'foreign State' refer to in the context of this Constitution?
Answer: Any State other than India.

Question: In the context of this Constitution, which country is not considered a 'foreign State'?
Answer: India

Question: What power does the Parliament have regarding the Constitution?
Answer: Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this article.

Question: What can the Parliament do to the Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Constitution's article?
Answer: Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution.

Question: How can an amendment of the Constitution be initiated?
Answer: An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the President who shall give his assent.

Question: What happens after a Bill to amend the Constitution is passed in each House of Parliament by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting?
Answer: After the Bill is passed in each House of Parliament, it is presented to the President who shall give his assent.

Question: What happens if an amendment seeks to make changes in certain articles or chapters of the constitution?
Answer: The amendment requires to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States by resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amendment is presented to the President for assent.

Question: What is the process for an amendment that seeks to change certain articles or chapters of the constitution before it is presented to the President for assent?
Answer: The amendment requires to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States by resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures.

Question: Does article 13 apply to any amendment made under this article?
Answer: No, nothing in article 13 shall apply to any amendment made under this article.

Question: Does anything in article 13 apply to any amendment made under the same article?
Answer: No, nothing in article 13 shall apply to any amendment made under this article.

Question: Can amendments of the Constitution be called into question in any court?
Answer: No, no amendment of the Constitution shall be called in question in any court on any ground.

Question: Is there any ground on which an amendment of the Constitution can be called into question in court?
Answer: No, no amendment of the Constitution shall be called in question in any court on any ground.

Question: Is there any limitation on the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution?
Answer: No, there is no limitation whatever on the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this Constitution under this article.

Question: Does the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of the Constitution under this article have any limitations?
Answer: No, there is no limitation whatever on the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution.

Question: What was the verdict of the court in the case of Minerva Mills Ltd. and Others Vs. Union of India and Others?
Answer: This section has been declared invalid by the Supreme Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. and Others Vs. Union of India and Others.

Question: Which section was declared invalid by the Supreme Court in the case of Minerva Mills Ltd. and Others Vs. Union of India and Others?
Answer: The verdict of the court was that this section has been declared invalid.

Question: What is the temporary power given to Parliament under section 369?
Answer: Parliament has the temporary power to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent List for a period of five years from the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What does the Constitution allow Parliament to do for a period of five years from its commencement, in relation to the State List and the Concurrent List?
Answer: Under section 369, Parliament is given the temporary power to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent List.

Question: What matters can laws be made about according to the text?
Answer: Trade and commerce within a State, production, supply and distribution of cotton and woollen textiles, raw cotton, cotton seed, paper, food-stuffs, cattle fodder, coal, iron, steel and mica.

Question: According to the text, can laws be made about the trade and commerce within a State, production, supply and distribution of cotton and woollen textiles, raw cotton, cotton seed, paper, food-stuffs, cattle fodder, coal, iron, steel and mica?
Answer: Yes, laws can be made about these matters.

Question: What does clause (b) refer to?
Answer: Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters mentioned in clause (a), jurisdiction and powers of all courts except the Supreme Court with respect to any of those matters, and fees in respect of any of those matters but not including fees taken in any court.

Question: What does the reference to 'offences against laws with respect to any of the matters mentioned in clause (a), jurisdiction and powers of all courts except the Supreme Court with respect to any of those matters, and fees in respect of any of those matters but not including fees taken in any court' correspond to in the context?
Answer: It refers to clause (b)

Question: What happens to a law made by Parliament that it would not have been competent to make without the provisions of this article?
Answer: It shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the said period, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration thereof.

Question: What happens to a law made by Parliament, which was not competent to make without the provisions of a certain article, after the expiration of the said period?
Answer: It shall cease to have effect, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration thereof.

Question: What are the temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir?
Answer: The provisions of article 238 shall not apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Question: Which article's provisions do not apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir?
Answer: The provisions of article 238 do not apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Question: What modification was made to article 370 on the 17th day of November, 1952?
Answer: The said art. 370 shall be operative with the modification that for the Explanation in cl. (1) thereof, the following Explanation is substituted.

Question: What was the modification made to the Explanation in clause (1) of article 370?
Answer: The following Explanation was substituted for the original one on the 17th day of November, 1952.

Question: What is the power of Parliament to make laws for the said State limited to?
Answer: The power of Parliament to make laws for the said State is limited to those matters in the Union List and the Concurrent List which, in consultation with the Government of the State, are declared by the President to correspond to matters specified in the Instrument of Accession governing the accession of the State to the Dominion of India as the matters with respect to which the Dominion Legislature may make laws for that State; and such other matters in the said Lists as, with the concurrence of the Government of the State, the President may by order specify.

Question: What matters are the Parliament's ability to make laws for a state limited to, and who must agree to these matters?
Answer: The Parliament's ability to make laws for a state are limited to matters in the Union List and the Concurrent List. These matters must be declared by the President to correspond to matters specified in the Instrument of Accession governing the state's accession to the Dominion of India. The President may also specify other matters in the said Lists, but this requires the concurrence of the State Government.

Question: What does the Government of the State mean for the purposes of this article?
Answer: For the purposes of this article, the Government of the State means the person for the time being recognised by the President as the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers for the time being in office under the Maharaja’s Proclamation dated the fifth day of March, 1948.

Question: Who is considered as the Government of the State in the context of the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers under the Maharaja’s Proclamation dated the fifth day of March, 1948?
Answer: For the purposes of this article, the Government of the State is the person for the time being recognised by the President as the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir.

Question: Which provisions of the Constitution apply in relation to that State?
Answer: The provisions of article 1 and of this article shall apply in relation to that State; such of the other provisions of this Constitution shall apply in relation to that State subject to such exceptions and modifications as the President may by order specify.

Question: What articles of the Constitution apply to a specific State and what modifications can be made?
Answer: The articles of the Constitution that apply to a specific State are article 1 and the article in question. The other provisions of the Constitution may also apply, subject to exceptions and modifications that the President may specify by order.

Question: Under what conditions can an order which relates to the matters specified in the Instrument of Accession of the State be issued?
Answer: An order which relates to the matters specified in the Instrument of Accession of the State can be issued only in consultation with the Government of the State.

Question: Who must be consulted before issuing an order which relates to the matters specified in the Instrument of Accession of the State?
Answer: The Government of the State must be consulted before issuing such an order.

Question: Under what conditions can an order which relates to matters other than those referred to in the last preceding proviso be issued?
Answer: An order which relates to matters other than those referred to in the last preceding proviso can be issued only with the concurrence of that Government.

Question: What is required for an order relating to matters other than those referred to in the last preceding proviso to be issued?
Answer: Only with the concurrence of that Government can such an order be issued.

Question: What does the Constituent Assembly do before convening the framing of the Constitution of the State?
Answer: The Constituent Assembly places it before such Assembly for such decision as it may take thereon.

Question: What does the Constituent Assembly do with the Constitution of the State before it is framed?
Answer: The Constituent Assembly places it before such Assembly for such decision as it may take thereon.

Question: Under what conditions may the President declare that an article shall cease to be operative or be operative only with exceptions and modifications?
Answer: The President may declare this after the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2).

Question: Who must recommend for the President to declare that an article shall cease to be operative or be operative only with exceptions and modifications?
Answer: The Constituent Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2) must recommend.

Question: What special provisions does the President have with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat?
Answer: The President may provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for the establishment of separate development boards, the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure, and an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities for technical education and vocational training and employment opportunities.

Question: What responsibilities can the President assign to the Governor for the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat?
Answer: The President can assign the Governor special responsibilities, including the establishment of separate development boards, the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure, and an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities for technical education and vocational training and employment opportunities.

Question: What are the special provisions with respect to the State of Nagaland?
Answer: No Act of Parliament in respect of religious or social practices of the Nagas, Naga customary law and procedure, and administration of civil and criminal justice.

Question: What does the Act of Parliament not regulate in the State of Nagaland?
Answer: Religious or social practices of the Nagas, Naga customary law and procedure, and administration of civil and criminal justice.

Question: What applies to the State of Nagaland according to Naga customary law?
Answer: Ownership and transfer of land and its resources apply to the State of Nagaland according to Naga customary law.

Question: According to Naga customary law, what applies to the ownership and transfer of land and its resources?
Answer: It applies to the State of Nagaland.

Question: What responsibility does the Governor of Nagaland have with respect to law and order?
Answer: The Governor of Nagaland has special responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of Nagaland, particularly during periods of internal disturbances.

Question: Who has special responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of Nagaland, particularly during periods of internal disturbances?
Answer: The Governor of Nagaland has special responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of Nagaland, particularly during periods of internal disturbances.

Question: What is the role of the Governor's discretion in the exercise of his duties?
Answer: The Governor's discretion is final in determining whether a matter is one in which he is required to act in the exercise of his individual judgment. The validity of anything done by the Governor cannot be questioned on the grounds of his discretion.

Question: Is the Governor's discretion final in determining whether a matter requires his individual judgment and can the validity of anything done by the Governor be questioned on the grounds of his discretion?
Answer: Yes, the Governor's discretion is final in determining whether a matter is one in which he is required to act in the exercise of his individual judgment. No, the validity of anything done by the Governor cannot be questioned on the grounds of his discretion.

Question: Under what conditions can the Governor of Nagaland cease to have special responsibility with respect to law and order?
Answer: The President can order the Governor of Nagaland to cease having special responsibility with respect to law and order if he is satisfied, based on a report from the Governor or otherwise, that it is no longer necessary.

Question: Who has the power to order the Governor of Nagaland to cease having special responsibility for law and order, and under what circumstances?
Answer: The President has the power to order the Governor of Nagaland to cease having special responsibility for law and order, specifically when he is satisfied, based on a report from the Governor or otherwise, that it is no longer necessary.

Question: What should the Governor of Nagaland ensure when making his recommendation with respect to any demand for a grant?
Answer: The Governor of Nagaland should ensure that any money provided by the Government of India out of the Consolidated Fund of India for any specific service or purpose is included in the demand for a grant relating to that service or purpose and not in any other demand.

Question: What should the Governor of Nagaland ensure about the money provided by the Government of India from the Consolidated Fund of India for any specific service or purpose?
Answer: The Governor of Nagaland should ensure that this money is included in the demand for a grant relating to that service or purpose and not in any other demand when making his recommendation.

Question: What is the regional council for the Tuensang district composed of?
Answer: The regional council for the Tuensang district is composed of thirty-five members.

Question: How many members are there in the regional council for the Tuensang district?
Answer: There are thirty-five members in the regional council for the Tuensang district.

Question: Who shall be the Chairman of the regional council for the Tuensang district?
Answer: The Deputy Commissioner of the Tuensang district shall be the Chairman ex officio of the regional council.

Question: Who is the Chairman ex officio of the regional council for the Tuensang district?
Answer: The Deputy Commissioner of the Tuensang district is the Chairman ex officio of the regional council.

Question: Who elects the Vice-Chairman of the regional council?
Answer: The Vice-Chairman of the regional council is elected by the members thereof from amongst themselves.

Question: Who are the Vice-Chairman of the regional council elected by?
Answer: The Vice-Chairman of the regional council is elected by the members thereof from amongst themselves.

Question: What does the Governor provide rules for in relation to the regional council?
Answer: The Governor provides rules for the composition of the council, qualifications for members, term of office, salaries and allowances, procedure and conduct of business, appointment of officers and staff and their conditions of service, and any other matters necessary for the constitution and proper functioning of the council.

Question: What aspects does the Governor's rules for the regional council cover?
Answer: The Governor's rules for the regional council cover the composition of the council, qualifications for members, term of office, salaries and allowances, procedure and conduct of business, appointment of officers and staff and their conditions of service, and any other matters necessary for the constitution and proper functioning of the council.

Question: Who will administer the Tuensang district for a period of ten years from the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland?
Answer: The Governor will administer the Tuensang district for a period of ten years from the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland.

Question: Who will administer the Tuensang district for a period of ten years from the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who decides the allocation of money provided by the Government of India to the Government of Nagaland?
Answer: The Governor, in his discretion, arranges for an equitable allocation of that money between the Tuensang district and the rest of the State.

Question: Who arranges for an equitable allocation of the money provided by the Government of India between the Tuensang district and the rest of the State of Nagaland?
Answer: The Governor, in his discretion, decides the allocation of that money.

Question: Under what conditions does an Act of the Legislature of Nagaland apply to Tuensang district?
Answer: No Act of the Legislature of Nagaland shall apply to Tuensang district unless the Governor, on the recommendation of the regional council, by public notification so directs.

Question: Who needs to direct that an Act of the Legislature of Nagaland applies to Tuensang district and under what recommendation?
Answer: The Governor needs to direct it on the recommendation of the regional council.

Question: What modifications can be made to the application of the act in the Tuensang district?
Answer: The act may be subject to exceptions or modifications as the Governor may specify on the recommendation of the regional council.

Question: Who can specify exceptions or modifications to the act in the Tuensang district and on whose recommendation?
Answer: The Governor can specify exceptions or modifications to the act on the recommendation of the regional council.

Question: Who can make regulations for the Tuensang district?
Answer: The Governor can make regulations for the Tuensang district.

Question: For which district can the Governor make regulations?
Answer: The Governor can make regulations for the Tuensang district.

Question: Who shall be appointed Minister for Tuensang affairs?
Answer: One of the members representing the Tuensang district in the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland shall be appointed Minister for Tuensang affairs by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister.

Question: Who appoints the Minister for Tuensang affairs and who is eligible for this position?
Answer: The Governor appoints one of the members representing the Tuensang district in the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland as the Minister for Tuensang affairs on the advice of the Chief Minister.

Question: Who has final say on all matters relating to the Tuensang district?
Answer: The final decision on all matters relating to the Tuensang district shall be made by the Governor in his discretion.

Question: Who makes the final decision on all matters relating to the Tuensang district?
Answer: The Governor in his discretion has final say on all matters relating to the Tuensang district.

Question: In articles 54 and 55 and clause (4) of article 80, who do the references to the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of a State include?
Answer: The references include the members or member of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland elected by the regional council established under this article.

Question: Who are the members or member of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland elected by the regional council established under this article referred to in articles 54 and 55 and clause (4) of article 80?
Answer: The references are to the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of a State.

Question: What is the effect of clause (1) in article 170 in relation to the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland?
Answer: Clause (1) shall have effect as if for the word 'sixty', the word 'forty-six' had been substituted.

Question: What is substituted for the word 'sixty' in clause (1) of article 170 in relation to the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland?
Answer: The word 'forty-six' is substituted for the word 'sixty'.

Question: What does the reference to direct election from territorial constituencies in the state in the said clause of article 170 include?
Answer: It includes election by the members of the regional council.

Question: What does the election by the members of the regional council refer to in the context of direct election from territorial constituencies in the state as per the clause of article 170?
Answer: It refers to the reference to direct election from territorial constituencies in the state in the said clause of article 170.

Question: What does the President have the authority to do if difficulties arise in implementing the provisions of this article?
Answer: The President may by order do anything (including any adaptation or modification of any other article) which appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing that difficulty.

Question: What can the President do by order when he identifies a necessity to remove a difficulty in implementing the provisions of an article?
Answer: The President may do anything (including any adaptation or modification of any other article) which appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing that difficulty.

Question: What is the time limit for the President to make such an order?
Answer: No such order shall be made after the expiration of three years from the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland.

Question: When does the time limit for the President to make such an order expire in relation to the formation of the State of Nagaland?
Answer: The time limit for the President to make such an order expires three years after the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland.

Question: What special provision is given with respect to the State of Assam?
Answer: The President may, by order made with respect to the State of Assam, provide for the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of that Assembly elected from the tribal areas specified in Part I of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule.

Question: What can the President provide for the State of Assam by order made with respect to it?
Answer: The President can provide for the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of that Assembly elected from the tribal areas specified in Part I of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule.

Question: What special provision is given with respect to the State of Manipur?
Answer: The President may, by order made with respect to the State of Manipur, provide for the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of that Assembly elected from the Hill Areas of that State.

Question: What can the President do with respect to the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of Manipur?
Answer: The President may, by order made with respect to the State of Manipur, provide for the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of that Assembly elected from the Hill Areas of that State.

Question: What does the Governor do annually or when required by the President?
Answer: The Governor makes a report to the President regarding the administration of the Hill Areas in the State of Manipur.

Question: To whom does the Governor of Manipur report about the administration of the Hill Areas in the State, annually or when required?
Answer: The Governor of Manipur makes a report to the President.

Question: What power does the Union have regarding the Hill Areas?
Answer: The executive power of the Union extends to giving directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas.

Question: To whom does the Union's executive power extend in the administration of the Hill Areas?
Answer: The Union's executive power extends to giving directions to the State.

Question: What does the term 'Hill Areas' refer to?
Answer: The term 'Hill Areas' refers to areas that the President may, by order, declare to be Hill areas.

Question: Who has the authority to declare areas as 'Hill Areas'?
Answer: The President has the authority to declare areas as 'Hill Areas'.

Question: What can the President provide for the State of Andhra Pradesh?
Answer: The President can provide for equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to different parts of the State in terms of public employment and education.

Question: What can the President do to ensure equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to different parts of a State in terms of public employment and education?
Answer: The President can provide for the State of Andhra Pradesh.

Question: What can an order made under clause (1) specify for the State of Andhra Pradesh?
Answer: The order can require the State Government to organise any class or classes of posts in a civil service or any class or classes of civil posts under the State into different local cadres for different parts of the State. It can also specify the local area for direct recruitment to posts in any local cadre under the State Government, for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre under any local authority within the State, and for the purposes of admission to any University within the State or to any other educational institution which is subject to the control of the State Government.

Question: What does the order requiring the State Government of Andhra Pradesh to organise any class or classes of posts in a civil service or any class or classes of civil posts under the State into different local cadres for different parts of the State, and specifying the local area for direct recruitment to posts in any local cadre under the State Government, for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre under any local authority within the State, and for the purposes of admission to any University within the State or to any other educational institution which is subject to the control of the State Government, made under clause (1)?
Answer: This order can be made under clause (1).

Question: What is the preference or reservation given to in the matter of direct recruitment?
Answer: Preference or reservation is given to candidates who have resided or studied for any period specified in the order in the local area in respect of such cadre.

Question: Who are the candidates given preference or reservation in the matter of direct recruitment?
Answer: Candidates who have resided or studied for any period specified in the order in the local area in respect of such cadre are given preference or reservation.

Question: What can the President provide for the constitution of in the State of Andhra Pradesh?
Answer: The President may provide for the constitution of an Administrative Tribunal.

Question: Who may provide for the constitution of an Administrative Tribunal in the State of Andhra Pradesh?
Answer: The President

Question: What jurisdiction, powers, and authority can the Administrative Tribunal exercise?
Answer: The Administrative Tribunal can exercise any jurisdiction, power and authority which immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, was exercisable by any court (other than the Supreme Court) or by any tribunal or other authority.

Question: What jurisdiction, power and authority was exercisable by any court (other than the Supreme Court) or by any tribunal or other authority immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973?
Answer: The jurisdiction, power and authority that was exercisable by any court (other than the Supreme Court) or by any tribunal or other authority immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, can now be exercised by the Administrative Tribunal.

Question: What matters does the jurisdiction of the Administrative Tribunal for the State of Andhra Pradesh cover?
Answer: The jurisdiction of the Administrative Tribunal covers appointment, allotment or promotion to certain classes of posts in any civil service of the State, seniority of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such classes of posts, and other conditions of service of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such classes of posts.

Question: What does the appointment, allotment or promotion to certain classes of posts in any civil service of the State, seniority of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such classes of posts, and other conditions of service of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such classes of posts pertain to?
Answer: These matters pertain to the jurisdiction of the Administrative Tribunal for the State of Andhra Pradesh.

Question: What is the preference or reservation given to in the matter of admission to any such University or other educational institution?
Answer: Preference or reservation is given to candidates who have resided or studied for any period specified in the order in the local area in respect of such University or other educational institution.

Question: Who is given preference or reservation in the matter of admission to any University or other educational institution?
Answer: Candidates who have resided or studied for any period specified in the order in the local area in respect of such University or other educational institution are given preference or reservation.

Question: What can an order made under clause (3) of The Constitution of India authorize the Administrative Tribunal to do?
Answer: The order can authorise the Administrative Tribunal to receive representations for the redress of grievances relating to any matter within its jurisdiction as the President may specify in the order and to make such orders thereon as the Administrative Tribunal deems fit.

Question: What does the order authorize the Administrative Tribunal to do, according to clause (3) of The Constitution of India, when it comes to grievances within its jurisdiction?
Answer: The order authorizes the Administrative Tribunal to receive representations for the redress of grievances relating to any matter within its jurisdiction as the President may specify in the order and to make such orders thereon as the Administrative Tribunal deems fit.

Question: What provisions can an order made under clause (3) contain regarding the powers and authorities of the Administrative Tribunal?
Answer: The order can contain provisions with respect to the powers and authorities and procedure of the Administrative Tribunal, including provisions with respect to the powers of the Administrative Tribunal to punish for contempt of itself, as the President may deem necessary.

Question: What provisions with respect to the powers, authorities and procedure of the Administrative Tribunal can be included in an order made under clause (3), as deemed necessary by the President?
Answer: An order made under clause (3) can contain provisions regarding the powers and authorities of the Administrative Tribunal, including its ability to punish for contempt of itself.

Question: What can an order made under clause (3) provide for in regards to the transfer of proceedings?
Answer: The order can provide for the transfer to the Administrative Tribunal of such classes of proceedings, being proceedings relating to matters within its jurisdiction and pending before any court (other than the Supreme Court) or tribunal or other authority immediately before the commencement of such order.

Question: Where can proceedings be transferred to under an order made under clause (3)?
Answer: The proceedings can be transferred to the Administrative Tribunal.

Question: When does the Order of the Administrative Tribunal become effective?
Answer: The Order of the Administrative Tribunal finally disposing of any case shall become effective upon its confirmation by the State Government or on the expiry of three months from the date on which the order is made, whichever is earlier.

Question: What happens to the Order of the Administrative Tribunal after its confirmation by the State Government or after three months have passed since its creation?
Answer: The Order of the Administrative Tribunal finally disposing of any case becomes effective.

Question: What can the State Government do before the order of the Administrative Tribunal becomes effective?
Answer: The State Government may, by special order made in writing and for reasons to be specified therein, modify or annul any order of the Administrative Tribunal before it becomes effective.

Question: How can the State Government modify or annul an order of the Administrative Tribunal before it becomes effective?
Answer: The State Government may do so by making a special order in writing, and specifying the reasons therein.

Question: What happens to a special order made by the State Government under the proviso to clause (5)?
Answer: Every special order made by the State Government under the proviso to clause (5) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made.

Question: What is the procedure for a special order made by the State Government under the proviso to clause (5) after it is made?
Answer: Every special order made by the State Government under the proviso to clause (5) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made.

Question: Who does not have any powers of superintendence over the Administrative Tribunal?
Answer: The High Court for the State

Question: Which court does not have any powers of superintendence over the Administrative Tribunal?
Answer: The High Court for the State

Question: Who declared cl. (5) of art. 371D along with the proviso to be unconstitutional and void?
Answer: The Supreme Court

Question: Which institution declared cl. (5) of art. 371D along with the proviso to be unconstitutional and void?
Answer: The Supreme Court

Question: Who can abolish the Administrative Tribunal?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the power to abolish the Administrative Tribunal?
Answer: The President

Question: What can the President do if he is satisfied that the continued existence of the Administrative Tribunal is not necessary?
Answer: The President may by order abolish the Administrative Tribunal and make such provisions in such order as he may deem fit for the transfer and disposal of cases pending before the Tribunal immediately before such abolition.

Question: What process does the President follow to abolish the Administrative Tribunal and how are the pending cases handled?
Answer: The President may by order abolish the Administrative Tribunal and make provisions in the order for the transfer and disposal of cases pending before the Tribunal immediately before its abolition, as he deems fit.

Question: What is not deemed to be illegal or void merely on the ground that the appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of such person was not made in accordance with any law, then in force?
Answer: No appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of any person made before the 1st day of November, 1956, to any post under the Government of, or any local authority within, the State of Hyderabad as it existed before that date; or made before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, to any post under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, the State of Andhra Pradesh; and no action taken or thing done by or before any person referred to in sub-clause (a).

Question: What appointments, postings, promotions or transfers are not considered illegal or void, even if they were not made in accordance with any law in force at the time, specifically before November 1, 1956, in the State of Hyderabad and before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, in the State of Andhra Pradesh?
Answer: The appointments, postings, promotions or transfers that are not considered illegal or void, even if they were not made in accordance with any law in force at the time, specifically are those made before the 1st day of November, 1956, to any post under the Government of, or any local authority within, the State of Hyderabad as it existed before that date; or made before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, to any post under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, the State of Andhra Pradesh. This also includes any action taken or thing done by or before any person referred to in these cases.

Question: What does article 371E provide for in Andhra Pradesh?
Answer: Article 371E provides that the Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of a University in the State of Andhra Pradesh.

Question: What does the Parliament have the authority to establish in the State of Andhra Pradesh according to Article 371E?
Answer: According to Article 371E, the Parliament has the authority to provide for the establishment of a University in the State of Andhra Pradesh.

Question: What special provisions are made for the State of Sikkim according to article 371F?
Answer: Article 371F provides special provisions for the State of Sikkim including: the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall consist of not less than thirty members; the assembly formed as a result of the elections held in Sikkim in April, 1974 with thirty-two members shall be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim under the Constitution; the period of five years in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed as references to a period of four years for the Assembly of Sikkim; and until other provisions are made by Parliament by law, there shall be allotted to the State of Sikkim one seat in the House of the People.

Question: What does Article 371F state about the legislative assembly of Sikkim, the period of years in clause (1) of article 172 for the Assembly of Sikkim, and the number of seats allotted to Sikkim in the House of People?
Answer: Article 371F provides special provisions for the State of Sikkim including: the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall consist of not less than thirty members; the assembly formed as a result of the elections held in Sikkim in April, 1974 with thirty-two members shall be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim under the Constitution; the period of five years in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed as references to a period of four years for the Assembly of Sikkim; and until other provisions are made by Parliament by law, there shall be allotted to the State of Sikkim one seat in the House of the People.

Question: What is the minimum number of members for the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim according to article 371F?
Answer: The minimum number of members for the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim is thirty according to article 371F.

Question: How many members does article 371F state as the minimum for the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim?
Answer: Article 371F states that the minimum number of members for the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim is thirty.

Question: When is the period of four years for the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim deemed to commence from?
Answer: The period of four years for the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim is deemed to commence from the appointed day.

Question: From what day is the period of four years for the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim deemed to commence?
Answer: The appointed day

Question: What is provided for the State of Sikkim in terms of representation in the House of People according to article 371F?
Answer: According to article 371F, until other provisions are made by Parliament by law, there shall be allotted to the State of Sikkim one seat in the House of the People.

Question: Which article states that until other provisions are made by Parliament by law, there shall be allotted to the State of Sikkim one seat in the House of the People?
Answer: Article 371F provides for this provision.

Question: What is the parliamentary constituency for Sikkim?
Answer: The parliamentary constituency for Sikkim is formed from one parliamentary constituency.

Question: How many parliamentary constituencies form the parliamentary constituency for Sikkim?
Answer: One parliamentary constituency forms the parliamentary constituency for Sikkim.

Question: How is the representative of the State of Sikkim in the House of the People elected?
Answer: The representative of the State of Sikkim in the House of the People is elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim.

Question: Who elects the representative of the State of Sikkim in the House of the People?
Answer: The representative of the State of Sikkim in the House of the People is elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim.

Question: What responsibility does the Parliament have regarding Sikkim's Legislative Assembly?
Answer: Parliament may make provision for the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim which may be filled by candidates belonging to different sections of the population, and for the delimitation of the assembly constituencies from which candidates belonging to such sections alone may stand for election.

Question: What provision can the Parliament make for the number of seats and delimitation of assembly constituencies in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim?
Answer: Parliament may make provision for the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim which may be filled by candidates belonging to different sections of the population, and for the delimitation of the assembly constituencies from which candidates belonging to such sections alone may stand for election.

Question: What is the special responsibility of the Governor of Sikkim?
Answer: The Governor of Sikkim has special responsibility for peace and for an equitable arrangement for ensuring the social and economic advancement of different sections of the population of Sikkim.

Question: Who has the special responsibility for peace and for an equitable arrangement for ensuring the social and economic advancement of different sections of the population of Sikkim?
Answer: The Governor of Sikkim has this special responsibility.

Question: What happens to the property and assets vested in the Government of Sikkim after the appointed day?
Answer: All property and assets vested in the Government of Sikkim before the appointed day shall, as from the appointed day, vest in the Government of the State of Sikkim.

Question: Where do all property and assets vested in the Government of Sikkim before the appointed day go after the appointed day?
Answer: After the appointed day, all property and assets vested in the Government of Sikkim before the appointed day vest in the Government of the State of Sikkim.

Question: What happens to the High Court of Sikkim after the appointed day?
Answer: The High Court functioning immediately before the appointed day in the territories comprised in the State of Sikkim shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to be the High Court for the State of Sikkim.

Question: Which court is deemed to be the High Court for the State of Sikkim on and from the appointed day?
Answer: The High Court functioning immediately before the appointed day in the territories comprised in the State of Sikkim.

Question: What happens to all courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers in Sikkim after the appointed day?
Answer: All courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of the State of Sikkim shall continue on and from the appointed day.

Question: What is the fate of all courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of the State of Sikkim on and from the appointed day?
Answer: They shall continue functioning as they were.

Question: What happens to the laws in force before the appointed day in the territories comprised in the State of Sikkim?
Answer: They continue to be in force therein until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.

Question: Until when do the laws in force before the appointed day continue to be in effect in the territories comprised in the State of Sikkim?
Answer: They continue to be in force therein until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.

Question: Who can make adaptations and modifications of laws in relation to the administration of the State of Sikkim?
Answer: The President may make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient.

Question: Who has the authority to make necessary or expedient adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment?
Answer: The President may make such adaptations and modifications of the law in relation to the administration of the State of Sikkim.

Question: Can the adaptations or modifications made by the president be questioned in any court of law?
Answer: No, any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law.

Question: Can the adaptations or modifications made by the president be questioned in any court of law?
Answer: No, any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law.

Question: Do the Supreme Court or any other court have jurisdiction in respect of any dispute or matter arising out of any treaty, agreement, engagement or other similar instrument relating to Sikkim?
Answer: No, neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or matter.

Question: Is it true that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any dispute or matter arising out of any treaty, agreement, engagement or other similar instrument relating to Sikkim?
Answer: Yes, it is true.

Question: What can the President do if any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the foregoing provisions of this article?
Answer: The President may, by order, do anything which appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing that difficulty.

Question: What can the President do to remove a difficulty that arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of an article?
Answer: The President may, by order, do anything which appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing that difficulty.

Question: What can the President do with any enactment which is in force in a State in India?
Answer: The President may, by public notification, extend with such restrictions or modifications as he thinks fit to the State of Sikkim any enactment which is in force in a State in India at the date of the notification.

Question: How can the President extend any enactment which is in force in a State in India to the State of Sikkim?
Answer: The President may, by public notification, extend with such restrictions or modifications as he thinks fit to the State of Sikkim any enactment which is in force in a State in India at the date of the notification.

Question: When can no such order be made according to the text?
Answer: After the expiry of two years from the appointed day

Question: What event happens after the expiry of two years from the appointed day that affects the making of an order?
Answer: No such order can be made

Question: What is deemed valid in relation to the State of Sikkim or the territories comprised therein?
Answer: All things done and all actions taken during the period commencing on the appointed day and ending immediately before the date on which the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, receives the assent of the President

Question: What is considered valid during the period commencing on the appointed day and ending immediately before the date on which the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, receives the assent of the President?
Answer: All things done and all actions taken in relation to the State of Sikkim or the territories comprised therein are deemed valid

Question: What does not apply to the State of Mizoram unless the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram decides?
Answer: No Act of Parliament in respect of religious or social practices of the Mizos, Mizo customary law and procedure, administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to Mizo customary law, ownership and transfer of land

Question: What is the Act of Parliament that doesn't apply to the State of Mizoram unless the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram decides?
Answer: The Act of Parliament in respect of religious or social practices of the Mizos, Mizo customary law and procedure, administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to Mizo customary law, ownership and transfer of land

Question: How many members should the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram consist of?
Answer: Not less than forty members

Question: What is the minimum number of members required for the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram?
Answer: Not less than forty members

Question: Who has special responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh?
Answer: The Governor of Arunachal Pradesh

Question: Which state in India does the Governor have special responsibility with respect to law and order?
Answer: Arunachal Pradesh

Question: Who has the final decision in the exercise of his individual judgment according to the clause?
Answer: The Governor

Question: According to the clause, who has the final decision in the exercise of individual judgment?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What can the President do if he is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the Governor to have special responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh?
Answer: He may by order direct that the Governor shall cease to have such responsibility with effect from such date as may be specified in the order

Question: What can the President do to stop the Governor's special responsibility regarding law and order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh?
Answer: The President may by order direct that the Governor shall cease to have such responsibility with effect from a specified date.

Question: How many members should the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh consist of, at minimum?
Answer: Thirty

Question: What is the minimum number of members in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh?
Answer: Thirty

Question: What is the minimum number of members the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa should consist of?
Answer: Thirty

Question: Which state in India has a Legislative Assembly consisting of thirty members?
Answer: Goa

Question: What special responsibilities can the President provide for the Governor with respect to the State of Karnataka?
Answer: Establishment of a separate development board for Hyderabad-Karnataka region, equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the said region, and equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to the said region in matters of public employment, education and vocational training.

Question: What does the establishment of a separate development board for Hyderabad-Karnataka region by the President for the Governor entail with respect to the State of Karnataka?
Answer: It entails equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the said region, and equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to the said region in matters of public employment, education and vocational training.

Question: What can an order made under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) provide for?
Answer: Reservation of a proportion of seats in educational and vocational training institutions in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region for students who belong to that region by birth

Question: What does the reservation of a proportion of seats in educational and vocational training institutions in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region for students who belong to that region by birth, pertain to?
Answer: It pertains to an order made under sub-clause (c) of clause (1)

Question: What does the law state about identification of posts under the State Government in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region?
Answer: The law states that there should be identification of posts or classes of posts under the State Government and in any body or organisation under the control of the State Government in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region. There should also be reservation of a proportion of such posts for persons who belong to that region by birth or by domicile and for appointment thereto by direct recruitment or by promotion or in any other manner as may be specified in the order.

Question: What does the law specify regarding the reservation and appointment of posts under the State Government and in any body or organisation under its control in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region?
Answer: The law specifies that there should be identification of posts or classes of posts under the State Government and in any body or organisation under the control of the State Government in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region. There should also be reservation of a proportion of such posts for persons who belong to that region by birth or by domicile and for appointment thereto by direct recruitment or by promotion or in any other manner as may be specified in the order.

Question: What happens to laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: All the laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.

Question: What will happen to the laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of the Constitution if they are not altered, repealed, or amended by a competent legislature or other competent authority?
Answer: All the laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue in force therein.

Question: What power does the President have in terms of adapting and modifying laws?
Answer: The President may by order make such adaptations and modifications of such law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made.

Question: What can the President do by order in order to adapt, modify, repeal or amend a law, and when does this change take effect?
Answer: The President may by order make such adaptations and modifications of such law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made.

Question: What limitations are there on the President's power to adapt and modify laws?
Answer: The President cannot make any adaptation or modification of any law after the expiration of three years from the commencement of this Constitution. Also, the President cannot prevent any competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the President.

Question: Can the President prevent any competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the President, and for how long can the President make any adaptation or modification of any law after the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: No, the President cannot prevent any competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the President. The President can make any adaptation or modification of any law only for three years from the commencement of the Constitution.

Question: What is included in the expression 'law in force' in this article?
Answer: The expression 'law in force' in this article shall include a law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What does the expression 'law in force' in the article refer to when discussing laws passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: The expression 'law in force' in this article refers to a law that was passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India prior to the start of the Constitution.

Question: What happens to a law that had extra-territorial effect before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: Any law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution had extra-territorial effect as well as effect in the territory of India shall continue to have such extra-territorial effect, subject to any adaptations and modifications.

Question: What will happen to a law made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India that had extra-territorial effect immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: Any such law will continue to have such extra-territorial effect, subject to any adaptations and modifications.

Question: What does the Constitution state about continuing any temporary law?
Answer: Nothing in this article shall be construed as continuing any temporary law in force beyond the date fixed for its expiration or the date on which it would have expired if this Constitution had not come into force.

Question: What happens to a temporary law in force beyond the date fixed for its expiration or the date on which it would have expired if the Constitution had not come into force?
Answer: The Constitution states that nothing in this article shall be construed as continuing any temporary law in force beyond that date.

Question: What happens to an Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of a Province under section 88 of the Government of India Act, 1935?
Answer: An Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of a Province under section 88 of the Government of India Act, 1935, and in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the first meeting after such commencement of the Legislative Assembly of that State functioning under clause (1) of article 382.

Question: When does an Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of a Province under section 88 of the Government of India Act, 1935, cease to operate if it's in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The Ordinance shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the first meeting after such commencement of the Legislative Assembly of that State functioning under clause (1) of article 382.

Question: What is the power of the President to adapt laws according to the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956?
Answer: For the purposes of bringing the provisions of any law in force in India or in any part thereof, immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, into accord with the provisions of this Constitution as amended by that Act, the President may by order make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made.

Question: What authority does the President have to adapt and modify laws in order to align them with the Constitution as amended by the Seventh Amendment Act, 1956?
Answer: The President has the power to make adaptations and modifications of any law that was in force in India or in any part thereof, immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient. The President can provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made.

Question: Who has the power to repeal or amend any law adapted or modified by the President?
Answer: A competent Legislature or other competent authority

Question: Who can modify or repeal laws that have been adapted or changed by the President?
Answer: A competent Legislature or other competent authority

Question: Who has the power to make order in respect of persons under preventive detention in certain cases?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to issue orders concerning individuals under preventive detention in certain circumstances?
Answer: The President

Question: What happens to the Judges of the Federal Court after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: They become the Judges of the Supreme Court, unless they have elected otherwise.

Question: Who do the Judges of the Federal Court become after the commencement of the Constitution, unless they have elected otherwise?
Answer: They become the Judges of the Supreme Court.

Question: What happens to all suits, appeals and proceedings pending in the Federal Court at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: They shall stand removed to the Supreme Court.

Question: Where are all suits, appeals and proceedings pending in the Federal Court at the commencement of this Constitution moved to?
Answer: They are moved to the Supreme Court.

Question: What will the judgments and orders of the Federal Court have after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: They shall have the same force and effect as if they had been delivered or made by the Supreme Court.

Question: What force and effect will the judgments and orders of the Federal Court have after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: They shall have the same force and effect as if they had been delivered or made by the Supreme Court.

Question: Does anything in this Constitution operate to invalidate the exercise of jurisdiction by His Majesty?
Answer: No

Question: Does the Constitution uphold the exercise of jurisdiction by His Majesty?
Answer: Yes

Question: What happens to orders of His Majesty in Council made on any appeal or petition after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Any order of His Majesty in Council made on any such appeal or petition after the commencement of this Constitution shall for all purposes have effect as if it were an order or decree made by the Supreme Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on such Court by this Constitution.

Question: What is the effect of any order of His Majesty in Council made on any appeal or petition after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Any order of His Majesty in Council made on any such appeal or petition after the commencement of this Constitution shall for all purposes have effect as if it were an order or decree made by the Supreme Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on such Court by this Constitution.

Question: What happens to the jurisdiction of the authority functioning as the Privy Council in a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: On and from the commencement of this Constitution the jurisdiction of the authority functioning as the Privy Council in a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule to entertain and dispose of appeals and petitions from or in respect of any judgment, decree or order of any court within that State shall cease, and all appeals and other proceedings pending before the said authority at such commencement shall be transferred to, and disposed of by, the Supreme Court.

Question: What happens to the appeals and other proceedings pending before the authority functioning as the Privy Council in a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: All appeals and other proceedings pending before the said authority at such commencement shall be transferred to, and disposed of by, the Supreme Court.

Question: What happens to the courts, authorities and officers in the territory of India after the provisions of this Constitution?
Answer: All courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of India, shall continue to exercise their respective functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution.

Question: What will the courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive and ministerial do after the provisions of this Constitution are implemented in the territory of India?
Answer: They shall continue to exercise their respective functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution.

Question: What happens to the Judges of a High Court in any Province holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: The Judges of a High Court in any Province holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the Judges of the High Court in the corresponding State, and shall thereupon be entitled to such salaries and allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for.

Question: What happens to the Judges of a High Court in any Province who were in office before the commencement of the Constitution, in terms of their position, salaries, allowances, leave of absence, and pension rights?
Answer: Unless they have elected otherwise, they become the Judges of the High Court in the corresponding State on the commencement of the Constitution, and are entitled to such salaries and allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for.

Question: Who is eligible for appointment as Chief Justice of the High Court according to article 221?
Answer: Any Judge, even if he is not a citizen of India, is eligible for appointment as Chief Justice of the High Court.

Question: According to Article 221, is a judge eligible for appointment as Chief Justice of the High Court even if they are not a citizen of India?
Answer: Yes, any Judge, even if he is not a citizen of India, is eligible for appointment as Chief Justice of the High Court.

Question: What happens to the Judges of a High Court in any Indian State corresponding to any State specified in Part B of the First Schedule after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Unless they have elected otherwise, they become the Judges of the High Court in the State so specified and continue to hold office until the expiration of such period as the President may by order determine.

Question: What happens to the Judges of a High Court in any Indian State specified in Part B of the First Schedule if they do not elect otherwise after the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: They become the Judges of the High Court in the State so specified and continue to hold office until the expiration of such period as the President may by order determine.

Question: Does the expression 'Judge' in article 221 include an acting Judge or an additional Judge?
Answer: No, the expression 'Judge' does not include an acting Judge or an additional Judge.

Question: Does the expression 'Judge' include an acting Judge or an additional Judge?
Answer: No, the expression 'Judge' does not include an acting Judge or an additional Judge.

Question: What happens to the Auditor-General of India after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Unless he has elected otherwise, the Auditor-General of India becomes the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and is entitled to continue to hold office until the expiration of his term of office.

Question: Who does the Auditor-General of India become after the commencement of the Constitution, unless he chooses otherwise? And until when can he hold the office?
Answer: The Auditor-General of India becomes the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and can hold office until the expiration of his term of office.

Question: What happens to the members of the Public Service Commission for the Dominion of India after the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Unless they have elected otherwise, they become the members of the Public Service Commission for the Union.

Question: Who becomes the members of the Public Service Commission for the Union after the commencement of the Constitution, if they haven't elected otherwise?
Answer: The members of the Public Service Commission for the Dominion of India become the members of the Public Service Commission for the Union unless they have elected otherwise.

Question: What happens to the members of a Public Service Commission of a Province or a Public Service Commission serving the needs of a group of Provinces before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: Unless they have elected otherwise, they become the members of the Public Service Commission for the corresponding State or the members of the Joint State Public Service Commission serving the needs of the corresponding States, and continue to hold office until the expiration of their term of office as determined under the rules which were applicable immediately before such commencement.

Question: What is the fate of the members of a Public Service Commission of a Province or a Public Service Commission serving the needs of a group of Provinces if they have not elected otherwise before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: They become the members of the Public Service Commission for the corresponding State or the members of the Joint State Public Service Commission serving the needs of the corresponding States, and continue to hold office until the expiration of their term of office as determined under the rules which were applicable immediately before such commencement.

Question: What is the duration of Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly as per the special provision?
Answer: Unless sooner dissolved, it will continue for a period of five years from the date referred to in section 29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and no longer. The expiration of the said period shall operate as a dissolution of that Legislative Assembly.

Question: What happens to the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly after the expiration of the five-year period from the date referred to in section 29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956?
Answer: The expiration of the said period operates as a dissolution of the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.

Question: What power does the President have in regards to removing difficulties in the transition from the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, to the provisions of the Constitution?
Answer: The President may, for the purpose of removing any difficulties, by order direct that this Constitution shall, during such period as may be specified.

Question: What can the President do to remove any difficulties during a specified period while transitioning from the Government of India Act, 1935, to the Constitution?
Answer: The President may, for the purpose of removing any difficulties, by order direct that this Constitution shall, during such period as may be specified.

Question: What powers does the President have according to this text?
Answer: The powers conferred on the President by this article, by article 324, by clause (3) of article 367 and by article 391.

Question: According to this text, which articles and clauses confer powers on the President?
Answer: The powers conferred on the President by this article, by article 324, by clause (3) of article 367 and by article 391.

Question: Who can exercise the powers of the President before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The Governor-General of the Dominion of India.

Question: Before the commencement of the Constitution, whose role was it to exercise the powers of the President?
Answer: The Governor-General of the Dominion of India.

Question: What is the short title of the Constitution according to Part XXII?
Answer: This Constitution may be called the Constitution of India.

Question: What does 'This Constitution may be called the Constitution of India' refer to in Part XXII?
Answer: It refers to the short title of the Constitution.

Question: When will the remaining provisions of this Constitution come into force?
Answer: On the twenty-sixth day of January, 1950.

Question: What significant event in the Constitution took place on the twenty-sixth day of January, 1950?
Answer: The remaining provisions of the Constitution came into force.

Question: What is the purpose of the authoritative text in the Hindi language?
Answer: The President shall cause to be published under his authority the translation of this Constitution in the Hindi language, signed by the members of the Constituent Assembly, with such modifications as may be necessary to bring it in conformity with the language, style and terminology adopted in the authoritative texts of Central Acts in the Hindi language, and incorporating therein all the amendments of this Constitution made before such publication.

Question: Who is responsible for publishing the translation of the Constitution in the Hindi language and what does it incorporate?
Answer: The President is responsible for publishing the translation of the Constitution in the Hindi language, ensuring it is in conformity with the language, style, and terminology adopted in the authoritative texts of Central Acts in Hindi, and incorporating all the amendments made before such publication.

Question: Who is responsible for the translation of the Constitution and every amendment in Hindi language?
Answer: The President is responsible for the translation of the Constitution and every amendment in Hindi language.

Question: Who is responsible for translating the Constitution and all its amendments into the Hindi language?
Answer: The President

Question: What is considered the authoritative text of the Constitution and its amendments?
Answer: The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof published under this article shall be deemed to be, for all purposes, the authoritative text thereof in the Hindi language.

Question: What is deemed to be the authoritative text of the Constitution and its amendments in the Hindi language?
Answer: The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof published under this article is considered the authoritative text in the Hindi language.

Question: What acts were repealed by the Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the Government of India Act, 1935?
Answer: The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the Government of India Act, 1935, together with all enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act, but not including the Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act, 1949, are hereby repealed.

Question: Which acts are repealed by the Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the Government of India Act, 1935, together with all enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act, but not including the Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act, 1949?
Answer: The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the Government of India Act, 1935 were repealed.

Question: What are the territories of Andhra Pradesh according to the First Schedule?
Answer: The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953, sub-section (1) of section 3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, and the Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968, but excluding the territories specified in the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959.

Question: Which Acts and Schedules specify the territories of Andhra Pradesh, and which territories are excluded?
Answer: The territories of Andhra Pradesh are specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953, sub-section (1) of section 3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, and the Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968. However, the territories specified in the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 are excluded.

Question: What are the territories of Assam according to the First Schedule?
Answer: The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the Province of Assam, the Khasi States and the Assam Tribal Areas, but excluding the territories specified in the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951 and the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 and the territories specified in sections 5, 6 and 7 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 and the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.

Question: Which territories were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the Province of Assam, the Khasi States, and the Assam Tribal Areas, but excluding the territories specified in the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951 and the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 and the territories specified in sections 5, 6 and 7 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 and the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015?
Answer: These are the territories of Assam according to the First Schedule.

Question: What territories does Bihar comprise of according to the text?
Answer: The territories comprised in the Province of Bihar include those specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, but excluding the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956, and the territories specified in clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 3 of the first mentioned Act and the territories specified in section 3 of the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000.

Question: Which act and clause specifies the territories comprised in the Province of Bihar? And which territories are excluded according to the same?
Answer: The territories comprised in the Province of Bihar are specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968. The territories excluded are those specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956, the territories specified in clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 3 of the first mentioned Act and the territories specified in section 3 of the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000.

Question: What territories are included in Gujarat according to the text?
Answer: The territories referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960.

Question: According to the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, what territories does sub-section (1) of section 3 refer to?
Answer: It refers to the territories included in Gujarat.

Question: What territories are included in Kerala according to the text?
Answer: The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 5 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.

Question: Which Act specifies the territories included in Kerala in its sub-section (1) of section 5?
Answer: The States Reorganisation Act, 1956.

Question: What territories are included in Madhya Pradesh according to the text?
Answer: The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 9 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the First Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959, but excluding the territories specified in section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.

Question: Which legal documents and sections specify the territories included in Madhya Pradesh?
Answer: The territories are specified in sub-section (1) of section 9 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the First Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959, but not the territories specified in section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.

Question: What territories are included in Tamil Nadu according to the text?
Answer: The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Madras or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and the territories specified in section 4 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, but excluding the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 and sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953 and the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 5, section 6 and clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the territories specified in the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act.

Question: Which territories were either comprised in the Province of Madras or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province before the commencement of this Constitution, and are specified in section 4 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, but excluding the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 and sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953 and the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 5, section 6 and clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the territories specified in the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act?
Answer: These territories are included in Tamil Nadu.

Question: What territories does Odisha consist of according to the constitution of India?
Answer: The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Odisha or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province.

Question: Which territories were either comprised in the Province of Odisha or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province before the commencement of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Odisha consists of these territories according to the constitution of India.

Question: What territories are excluded from Punjab as per the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960?
Answer: The territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960 and the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3, section 4 and sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.

Question: Which territories are referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960 and the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3, section 4 and sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966?
Answer: These are the territories that are excluded from Punjab as per the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960.

Question: What territories does Rajasthan consist of?
Answer: The territories specified in section 10 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 but excluding the territories specified in the First Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959.

Question: Which act specifies the territories that Rajasthan consists of, and which act excludes certain territories from it?
Answer: The territories of Rajasthan are specified in section 10 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but the territories specified in the First Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959 are excluded.

Question: What territories are included in Uttar Pradesh?
Answer: The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province known as the United Provinces or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province, the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, and the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979.

Question: Which territories immediately before the commencement of the Constitution, were either comprised in the Province known as the United Provinces or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province, and which territories are specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, and in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979?
Answer: These territories are included in Uttar Pradesh.

Question: What territories are excluded from Uttar Pradesh?
Answer: The territories specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979.

Question: Which clause of what act specifies the territories excluded from Uttar Pradesh?
Answer: Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979 specifies the territories excluded from Uttar Pradesh.

Question: What territories does West Bengal comprise of?
Answer: The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and the territory of Chandernagore as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 and also the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 and also the territories referred to in Part III of the First Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part III of the First Schedule and the territories referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015

Question: Which territories were immediately before the commencement of the Constitution either comprised in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province, and what are the territories specified in clause (c) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954, sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956, and in Part III of the First Schedule, excluding the territories referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015?
Answer: These territories comprise of West Bengal.

Question: What territory did Jammu and Kashmir comprise of before the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Question: What was the territory comprised in the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: Jammu and Kashmir

Question: What territories does Nagaland comprise of?
Answer: The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.

Question: Which Act specifies the territories of Nagaland in its sub-section (1) of section 3?
Answer: The State of Nagaland Act, 1962.

Question: What territories does Haryana comprise of?
Answer: The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 and the territories specified in clause (a) of subsection (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979, but excluding the territories specified in clause (v) of sub-section.

Question: Which act and sections specify the territories of Haryana?
Answer: The territories of Haryana are specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 and the territories specified in clause (a) of subsection (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979.

Question: What territories were being administered as Chief Commissioners’ Provinces under the names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur before the commencement of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were being administered as if they were Chief Commissioners’ Provinces under the names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur.

Question: What is the status of the territories which immediately before the commencement of the Indian Constitution were being administered as if they were Chief Commissioners’ Provinces under the names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur?
Answer: These territories were being administered as Chief Commissioners’ Provinces under the names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur before the commencement of the Indian Constitution.

Question: What territory was being administered as a Chief Commissioner’s Province under the name of Manipur before the commencement of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was being administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner’s Province under the name of Manipur.

Question: What is the name of the territory that was administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner’s Province immediately before the commencement of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: Manipur

Question: What territory was being administered as a Chief Commissioner’s Province under the name of Tripura before the commencement of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was being administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner’s Province under the name of Tripura.

Question: What was the status of the territory known as Tripura before the commencement of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: It was being administered as a Chief Commissioner’s Province.

Question: What territories does the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015 refer to?
Answer: The territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.

Question: Which act refers to the territories in Part II of the First Schedule?
Answer: The Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.

Question: What territories were comprised in Sikkim before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975?
Answer: The territories which immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, were comprised in Sikkim.

Question: Which territories, immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act 1975, were included in Sikkim?
Answer: The territories which were included in Sikkim before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975 are the same territories that were comprised in Sikkim.

Question: What territories are specified in section 3 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987?
Answer: The territories specified in section 3 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.

Question: In which section of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 are the territories specified?
Answer: The territories are specified in section 3 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.

Question: What territories are specified in section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000?
Answer: The territories specified in section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.

Question: Which Act specifies the territories in its section 3?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.

Question: What territories are specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000?
Answer: The territories specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.

Question: Which section of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 specifies the territories?
Answer: Section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 specifies the territories.

Question: What is the territory of Delhi according to the constitution?
Answer: The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s Province of Delhi.

Question: What was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s Province of Delhi immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The territory of Delhi

Question: What is the territory of The Andaman and Nicobar Islands according to the constitution?
Answer: The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s Province of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

Question: What was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s Province of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands immediately before the commencement of the constitution?
Answer: The territory of The Andaman and Nicobar Islands according to the constitution

Question: What is the territory of Lakshadweep according to the constitution?
Answer: The territory specified in section 6 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.

Question: Which Act specifies the territory of Lakshadweep?
Answer: The States Reorganisation Act, 1956.

Question: What is the territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli according to the constitution?
Answer: The territory which immediately before the eleventh day of August, 1961 was comprised in Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli.

Question: What became of the territory that was comprised in Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli immediately before the eleventh day of August, 1961 according to the constitution?
Answer: It became the territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli.

Question: What is the territory of Daman and Diu according to the constitution?
Answer: The territories specified in section 4 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.

Question: Which act specifies the territories of Daman and Diu?
Answer: The Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987

Question: What is the emolument per month for the President according to the constitution?
Answer: 10,000 rupees

Question: Who, according to the constitution, receives a monthly emolument of 10,000 rupees?
Answer: The President

Question: What is the emolument per month for the Governor of a State according to the constitution?
Answer: 5,500 rupees

Question: According to the constitution, who receives a monthly emolument of 5,500 rupees?
Answer: The Governor of a State

Question: What allowances are paid to the President and to the Governors of the States according to the constitution?
Answer: Such allowances as were payable respectively to the Governor-General of the Dominion of India and to the Governors of the corresponding Provinces immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What allowances were payable respectively to the Governor-General of the Dominion of India and to the Governors of the corresponding Provinces immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: Those allowances are now paid to the President and to the Governors of the States according to the constitution.

Question: What privileges are the President and the Governors of the States entitled to according to the constitution?
Answer: They shall be entitled to the same privileges to which the Governor General and the Governors of the corresponding Provinces were respectively entitled immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: Who is entitled to the same privileges as the Governor General and the Governors of the corresponding Provinces were entitled to immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The President and the Governors of the States are entitled to these privileges according to the constitution.

Question: What is the entitlement of a person who discharges the functions of the Governor?
Answer: The person shall be entitled to the same emoluments, allowances and privileges as the President or the Governor.

Question: Who is entitled to the same emoluments, allowances, and privileges as the President or the Governor?
Answer: A person who discharges the functions of the Governor is entitled to the same emoluments, allowances, and privileges as the President or the Governor.

Question: Who are the positions mentioned in Part C of the provisions?
Answer: The positions are the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State.

Question: Which positions does the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State refer to in the provisions?
Answer: These positions are mentioned in Part C of the provisions.

Question: What are the salaries and allowances of the Speaker of the House of People and the Chairman of the Council of States?
Answer: Their salaries and allowances are the same as what were payable to the Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: Who receives the same salaries and allowances as the Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India did immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The Speaker of the House of People and the Chairman of the Council of States receive the same salaries and allowances.

Question: What are the salaries and allowances of the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States?
Answer: Their salaries and allowances are the same as what were payable to the Deputy Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: Who receives the same salaries and allowances as the Deputy Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: The Deputy Speaker of the House of the People and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States receive the same salaries and allowances.

Question: What are the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: Their salaries and allowances are the same as what were payable respectively to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the President and the Deputy President of the Legislative Council of the corresponding Province immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What is the basis for the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State?
Answer: Their salaries and allowances are the same as what were payable respectively to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the President and the Deputy President of the Legislative Council of the corresponding Province immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What is the salary for the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, as per the document?
Answer: 10,000 rupees, but it has been updated to 1,00,000 rupees as of 2009

Question: What was the original salary of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and what is it updated to as of 2009?
Answer: The original salary was 10,000 rupees, but it has been updated to 1,00,000 rupees as of 2009

Question: What is the salary for any other Judge of the Supreme Court, as per the document?
Answer: 9,000 rupees, but it has been updated to 90,000 rupees as of 2009

Question: What was the updated salary for a Supreme Court Judge in 2009, and what was it previously?
Answer: The updated salary for a Supreme Court Judge in 2009 was 90,000 rupees, up from the previous salary of 9,000 rupees.

Question: How is the salary of a Judge of the Supreme Court affected if they receive a pension or retirement gratuity?
Answer: Their salary is reduced by the amount of the pension or the pension equivalent of the retirement gratuity.

Question: What happens to the salary of a Supreme Court Judge if they are receiving a pension or retirement gratuity?
Answer: Their salary is reduced by the amount of the pension or the pension equivalent of the retirement gratuity.

Question: What are the judges of the Supreme Court entitled to, regarding their residence?
Answer: Every Judge of the Supreme Court is entitled to the use of an official residence without payment of rent.

Question: Who is entitled to the use of an official residence without payment of rent?
Answer: Every Judge of the Supreme Court is entitled to this.

Question: Who are the exceptions to the sub-paragraph (2) regarding the official residence?
Answer: A Judge who was holding office as the Chief Justice of the Federal Court or any other Judge of the Federal Court at the time of the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What position was held by the person who is an exception to the sub-paragraph (2) regarding the official residence at the time of the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The position was held by a Judge who was the Chief Justice of the Federal Court or any other Judge of the Federal Court.

Question: Who is entitled to receive special pay in addition to their salary?
Answer: The Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme Court who has spent time on actual service.

Question: What additional benefits does the Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme Court receive after spending time on actual service?
Answer: They are entitled to receive special pay in addition to their salary.

Question: What allowances do Judges of the Supreme Court receive?
Answer: They receive reasonable allowances to reimburse for expenses incurred in travelling on duty within the territory of India.

Question: Who receives reasonable allowances to reimburse for expenses incurred in travelling on duty within the territory of India?
Answer: Judges of the Supreme Court receive these allowances.

Question: Who determines the travelling facilities for the Judges of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The President prescribes the travelling facilities.

Question: Who prescribes the travelling facilities for the Judges of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The President

Question: What governs the rights in respect of leave of absence and pension of the Judges of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The provisions which, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, were applicable to the Judges of the Federal Court.

Question: What were applied to the Judges of the Federal Court that now governs the rights in respect of leave of absence and pension of the Judges of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The provisions which, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution

Question: What is the salary of the Chief Justice and any other Judge of the High Court?
Answer: The Chief Justice receives 90,000 rupees and any other Judge receives 80,000 rupees.

Question: Who receives a salary of 90,000 rupees and who receives 80,000 rupees in the High Court?
Answer: The Chief Justice receives 90,000 rupees and any other Judge receives 80,000 rupees.

Question: What happens to the salary of a Judge of a High Court if they are in receipt of a pension at the time of their appointment?
Answer: Their salary in respect of service in the High Court shall be reduced by the amount of that pension.

Question: What is the effect on the salary of a High Court Judge if they are receiving a pension at the time of their appointment?
Answer: Their salary in respect of service in the High Court shall be reduced by the amount of that pension.

Question: Who will be entitled to receive an amount equivalent to the difference between their current salary and the salary they were drawing before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: Every person who was holding office as the Chief Justice of a High Court or any other Judge of a High Court and has become the Chief Justice or a Judge of the High Court in the corresponding State under clause (1) of article 376, if they were drawing a salary at a higher rate before the commencement of the Constitution.

Question: Who is the person that was holding office as the Chief Justice of a High Court or any other Judge of a High Court and has become the Chief Justice or a Judge of the High Court in the corresponding State under clause (1) of article 376, and was drawing a salary at a higher rate before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: This person is entitled to receive an amount equivalent to the difference between their current salary and the salary they were drawing before the commencement of the Constitution.

Question: Who will be entitled to receive the same amount as allowance in addition to the salary specified in sub-paragraph (1), if they were drawing an allowance before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956?
Answer: Any person who was holding office as the Chief Justice of the High Court of a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule and has become the Chief Justice of the High Court of a State specified in the amended Schedule by the Act.

Question: Who was holding office as the Chief Justice of the High Court of a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule and has become the Chief Justice of the High Court of a State specified in the amended Schedule by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, and is entitled to receive the same amount as allowance in addition to the salary if they were drawing an allowance before the commencement of the Act?
Answer: Any person

Question: What happens to the pension of a person in relation to their previous service if they have commuted the value thereof before their appointment?
Answer: It will be reduced by the amount of that portion of the pension.

Question: What will happen to the pension of a person who has commuted the value of their previous service before their appointment?
Answer: It will be reduced by the amount of that portion of the pension.

Question: What happens if a person has received a retirement gratuity in respect of their previous service before such appointment?
Answer: It will be reduced by the pension equivalent of that gratuity.

Question: What happens to the retirement gratuity a person has received from their previous service when they receive a pension?
Answer: The retirement gratuity will be reduced by the pension equivalent of that gratuity.

Question: What does the expression 'Chief Justice' include?
Answer: The expression 'Chief Justice' includes an acting Chief Justice.

Question: What is included in the role of an acting Chief Justice?
Answer: The role of an acting Chief Justice is included in the expression 'Chief Justice'.

Question: What is included in the term 'Judge'?
Answer: The term 'Judge' includes an ad hoc Judge.

Question: What term includes an ad hoc Judge?
Answer: The term 'Judge' includes an ad hoc Judge.

Question: What does 'actual service' include for a Judge?
Answer: Actual service includes time spent by a Judge on duty as a Judge or in the performance of such other functions as he may at the request of the President undertake to discharge, vacations excluding any time during which the Judge is absent on leave, and joining time on transfer from a High Court to the Supreme Court or from one High Court to another.

Question: What is meant by a Judge's time on duty, performance of other functions at the request of the President, vacations excluding leave time, and joining time on transfer from one court to another?
Answer: These terms refer to 'actual service' for a Judge.

Question: What is the salary of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be paid a salary at the rate of four thousand rupees per mensem.

Question: Who receives a salary at the rate of four thousand rupees per mensem in India?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India receives a salary at the rate of four thousand rupees per mensem.

Question: What additional pay is the person, who was holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution as Auditor-General of India, entitled to?
Answer: The person who was holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution as Auditor-General of India and has become on such commencement the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India under article 377 shall in addition to the salary specified in sub-paragraph (1) be entitled to receive as special pay an amount equivalent to the difference between the salary so specified and the salary which he was drawing as Auditor-General of India immediately before such commencement.

Question: Who is entitled to receive as special pay an amount equivalent to the difference between the salary so specified and the salary which he was drawing as Auditor-General of India immediately before the commencement of the Constitution?
Answer: The person who was holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution as Auditor-General of India and has become on such commencement the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India under article 377 is entitled to this additional pay.

Question: What governs the rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and the other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
Answer: The rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and the other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be governed or shall continue to be governed, as the case may be, by the provisions which were applicable to the Auditor-General of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution and all references in those provisions to the Governor-General shall be construed as references to the President.

Question: Which provisions govern the rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, and to whom do references to the Governor-General in those provisions now refer?
Answer: The rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and the other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India are governed by the provisions which were applicable to the Auditor-General of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution. All references in those provisions to the Governor-General are now construed as references to the President.

Question: What is the salary of the Judges of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The salary of Judges of the Supreme Court has been raised to Rs.90,000 per mensem.

Question: What has been the recent increase in the salary of the Judges of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The salary of Judges of the Supreme Court has been raised to Rs.90,000 per mensem.

Question: What is the form of oath of office for a Minister for the Union?
Answer: “I, A. B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”

Question: Who swears, 'I, A. B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will'?
Answer: A Minister for the Union

Question: What is the form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for the Union?
Answer: “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”

Question: What is the oath that states 'I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister'?
Answer: It is the form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for the Union.

Question: What is the form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to Parliament?
Answer: “I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Council of States (or the House of the People) do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.”

Question: What does candidate A.B. swear to uphold when nominated to fill a seat in the Council of States or the House of the People in India?
Answer: Candidate A.B. swears to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.

Question: What is the form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament?
Answer: “I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the People) do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”

Question: What does A.B., a member of the Council of States (or the House of the People), swear to uphold and bear true faith to after being elected or nominated?
Answer: A.B. swears in the name of God that he will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and faithfully discharge the duty upon which he is about to enter.

Question: What is the form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India?
Answer: “I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or Comptroller and Auditor-General of India) do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and solemnly affirm faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”

Question: Who is required to swear in the name of God to uphold the Constitution and laws of India, bear true faith and allegiance, uphold sovereignty and integrity, and perform their duties without fear, favour, affection or ill-will?
Answer: The Judges of the Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India are required to make this oath or affirmation.

Question: What is the form of oath of office for a Minister for a State?
Answer: “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith solemnly affirm and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of ..........and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”

Question: What does Minister for a State swear to uphold and discharge in his oath of office?
Answer: The Minister for a State swears to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, faithfully and conscientiously discharge his duties as a Minister for the State, and to do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.

Question: What is the form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for a State?
Answer: “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will not directly or solemnly affirm indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the State of ....................except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”

Question: What does a Minister for a State swear or affirm not to do in their oath of secrecy?
Answer: A Minister for a State swears or affirms not to directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under their consideration or shall become known to them, except as may be required for the due discharge of their duties as such Minister.

Question: What is the form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to the Legislature of a State?
Answer: “I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established.

Question: What does A.B. swear to do in the oath taken when nominated as a candidate for the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council) in India?
Answer: A.B. swears to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established.

Question: What is the form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a State in India?
Answer: "I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God that solemnly affirm I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter."

Question: Who says the oath 'I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God that solemnly affirm I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter'?
Answer: A member of the Legislature of a State in India

Question: What is the form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of a High Court in India?
Answer: "I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) ………-….. do swear in the name of God that I will bear solemnly affirm true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws."

Question: What does a Chief Justice or Judge of a High Court in India swear to uphold and perform during their oath or affirmation?
Answer: During their oath or affirmation, a Chief Justice or Judge of a High Court in India swears to bear solemnly affirm true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, perform the duties of their office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and uphold the Constitution and the laws.

Question: How many seats are allocated to Andhra Pradesh in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: 18

Question: Which Indian state is allocated 18 seats in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Andhra Pradesh

Question: How many seats are allocated to Assam in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: 7

Question: Which Indian state is allocated 7 seats in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Assam

Question: How many seats are allocated to Bihar in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: 16

Question: Which Indian state is allocated 16 seats in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Bihar

Question: How many seats are allocated to Jharkhand in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: 6

Question: Which state is allocated 6 seats in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Jharkhand

Question: How many seats are allocated to Goa in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: 1

Question: Which state is allocated only one seat in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Goa

Question: How many seats are allocated to Gujarat in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: 11

Question: Which state is allocated 11 seats in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Gujarat

Question: How many seats are allocated to Haryana in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: 5

Question: Which Indian state is allocated 5 seats in the Council of States according to the FOURTH SCHEDULE of the Constitution of India?
Answer: Haryana

Question: What is the number associated with Madhya Pradesh?
Answer: 11

Question: Which Indian state is associated with the number 11?
Answer: Madhya Pradesh

Question: What is the number associated with Chhattisgarh?
Answer: 5

Question: Which state is associated with the number 5?
Answer: Chhattisgarh

Question: What is the number associated with Tamil Nadu?
Answer: 18

Question: Which Indian state is associated with the number 18?
Answer: Tamil Nadu

Question: What is the number associated with Maharashtra?
Answer: 19

Question: Which state is associated with the number 19?
Answer: Maharashtra

Question: What is the number associated with Karnataka?
Answer: 12

Question: Which state is associated with the number 12?
Answer: Karnataka

Question: What is the number associated with Odisha?
Answer: 10

Question: Which state is associated with the number 10?
Answer: Odisha

Question: What is the number associated with Punjab?
Answer: 7

Question: Which state is associated with the number 7?
Answer: Punjab

Question: What is the number associated with Rajasthan?
Answer: 10

Question: Which state is associated with the number 10?
Answer: Rajasthan

Question: What is the number associated with Uttar Pradesh?
Answer: 31

Question: Which state is associated with the number 31?
Answer: Uttar Pradesh

Question: What is the number associated with Uttarakhand?
Answer: 3

Question: Which region is associated with the number 3?
Answer: Uttarakhand

Question: What is the number associated with West Bengal?
Answer: 16

Question: Which state is associated with the number 16?
Answer: West Bengal

Question: What is the number associated with Jammu and Kashmir?
Answer: 4

Question: Which place is associated with the number 4?
Answer: Jammu and Kashmir

Question: What is the number associated with Nagaland?
Answer: 1

Question: Which region is associated with the number 1?
Answer: Nagaland

Question: What is the number associated with Himachal Pradesh?
Answer: 3

Question: Which state is associated with the number 3?
Answer: Himachal Pradesh

Question: What is the number associated with Manipur?
Answer: 1

Question: What is the state associated with the number 1?
Answer: Manipur

Question: What is the number associated with Tripura?
Answer: 1

Question: Which state is associated with the number 1?
Answer: Tripura

Question: What is the number associated with Meghalaya?
Answer: 1

Question: What is associated with the number 1 in the context of Indian states?
Answer: Meghalaya

Question: What is the number associated with Sikkim?
Answer: 1

Question: Which place is associated with the number 1?
Answer: Sikkim

Question: What is the number associated with Mizoram?
Answer: 1

Question: Which state is associated with the number 1?
Answer: Mizoram

Question: What is the number associated with Arunachal Pradesh?
Answer: 3

Question: Which state is associated with the number 3?
Answer: Arunachal Pradesh

Question: What is the number associated with Delhi?
Answer: 1

Question: Which city is associated with the number 1?
Answer: Delhi

Question: What is the number associated with Puducherry?
Answer: 1

Question: Which region is associated with the number 1?
Answer: Puducherry

Question: What is the total number?
Answer: 233

Question: Is the total number 233?
Answer: Yes

Question: Which states are excluded from the expression 'State' in the interpretation of the Fifth Schedule of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram

Question: From what expression in the interpretation of the Fifth Schedule of the Indian Constitution are Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, and Mizoram excluded?
Answer: State

Question: Who is responsible for making a report to the President regarding the administration of Scheduled Areas?
Answer: The Governor of each State having Scheduled Areas

Question: What is the role of the Governor of each State having Scheduled Areas in relation to the President?
Answer: They are responsible for making a report to the President regarding the administration of Scheduled Areas

Question: What is the Tribes Advisory Council?
Answer: The Tribes Advisory Council is a body established in each State having Scheduled Areas and, if directed by the President, also in any State having Scheduled Tribes but not Scheduled Areas. It consists of not more than twenty members, three-fourths of whom should be representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in the State's Legislative Assembly. The council's duty is to advise on matters related to the welfare and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes in the State.

Question: What is the composition of the Tribes Advisory Council and what are its duties?
Answer: The Tribes Advisory Council consists of not more than twenty members, three-fourths of whom should be representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in the State's Legislative Assembly. The council's duty is to advise on matters related to the welfare and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes in the State.

Question: What happens if the number of representatives of Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly is less than the number of seats in the Tribes Advisory Council?
Answer: If the number of representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State is less than the number of seats in the Tribes Advisory Council to be filled by such representatives, the remaining seats shall be filled by other members of those tribes.

Question: How are the remaining seats filled in the Tribes Advisory Council if the number of representatives from the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly is less than the required number?
Answer: The remaining seats are filled by other members of those tribes.

Question: Who can make rules for the Tribes Advisory Council?
Answer: The Governor can make rules prescribing or regulating the number of members of the Council, the mode of their appointment, the conduct of its meetings and its procedure in general, and all other incidental matters.

Question: What powers does the Governor have regarding the Tribes Advisory Council?
Answer: The Governor can make rules prescribing or regulating the number of members of the Council, the mode of their appointment, the conduct of its meetings and its procedure in general, and all other incidental matters.

Question: What power does the Governor have regarding laws applicable to Scheduled Areas?
Answer: The Governor may direct that any particular Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall not apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State or shall apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State subject to exceptions and modifications as specified in the notification. The Governor can also make regulations for the peace and good government of any area in a State which is for the time being a Scheduled Area.

Question: What actions can a Governor take with regards to a particular Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State in a Scheduled Area, and what regulations can they make?
Answer: The Governor may direct that any particular Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall not apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State or shall apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State subject to exceptions and modifications as specified in the notification. The Governor can also make regulations for the peace and good government of any area in a State which is for the time being a Scheduled Area.

Question: Who can regulate the transfer of land among members of the Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who is responsible for regulating the transfer of land among members of the Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who has the authority to regulate the allotment of land to members of the Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What is the role of the Governor in regulating the allotment of land to members of the Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Governor has the authority to regulate the allotment of land to members of the Scheduled Tribes.

Question: Who can regulate the business of money-lender to members of the Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who has the authority to regulate the business of money-lender to members of the Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who must the regulations made under this paragraph be submitted to?
Answer: The President

Question: To whom must the regulations made under a certain paragraph be submitted?
Answer: The President

Question: Who should be consulted before making a regulation under this paragraph if there is a Tribes Advisory Council for the State?
Answer: The Tribes Advisory Council

Question: Who is to be consulted before making a regulation under a given paragraph if there is a specific advisory council for the State?
Answer: The Tribes Advisory Council

Question: What does the expression 'Scheduled Areas' mean in this Constitution?
Answer: Such areas as the President may by order declare to be Scheduled Areas

Question: Who has the authority to declare areas as 'Scheduled Areas' according to the Constitution?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to alter the boundaries of a Scheduled Area?
Answer: The President

Question: What role has the authority to alter the boundaries of a Scheduled Area?
Answer: The President

Question: Who can declare any territory not previously included in any State to be part of a Scheduled Area?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the power to declare any territory not previously included in any State to be part of a Scheduled Area?
Answer: The President

Question: Who can rescind any order made under this paragraph relating to Scheduled Areas?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to rescind orders made under the paragraph relating to Scheduled Areas?
Answer: The President

Question: Who should be consulted before redefining the areas which are to be Scheduled Areas?
Answer: The Governor of the State concerned

Question: Who needs to be consulted before redefining the areas which are to be Scheduled Areas in a specific state?
Answer: The Governor of the State concerned

Question: What does the President have the power to do according to the text?
Answer: The President has the power to make incidental and consequential provisions as appear to be necessary and proper.

Question: Who has the power to make incidental and consequential provisions as appear to be necessary and proper according to the text?
Answer: The President has the power to do so.

Question: Can the order made under sub-paragraph (1) be varied by any subsequent order?
Answer: No, the order made under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall not be varied by any subsequent order.

Question: Is it possible for the order made under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph to be varied by any subsequent order?
Answer: No

Question: Who has the power to amend the Schedule according to PART D of the constitution?
Answer: Parliament has the power to amend the Schedule.

Question: What power does the Parliament have according to PART D of the constitution?
Answer: The Parliament has the power to amend the Schedule.

Question: What is the procedure for amending the Schedule?
Answer: Parliament may from time to time by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Schedule.

Question: Who has the authority to amend, add, vary, or repeal any of the provisions of the Schedule and how often can they do it?
Answer: Parliament may from time to time by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Schedule.

Question: How should a reference to the Schedule in the Constitution be construed when the Schedule is amended?
Answer: Any reference to this Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such Schedule as so amended.

Question: How should any reference to this Schedule in this Constitution be interpreted after the Schedule has been amended?
Answer: A reference to the Schedule in the Constitution should be construed as a reference to such Schedule as so amended.

Question: Is the law mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph considered an amendment of the Constitution?
Answer: No, such law shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.

Question: What is the purpose of the law mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to article 368 of the Constitution?
Answer: The law is not meant to serve as an amendment of the Constitution.

Question: What are the tribal areas in each item of Parts I, II and IIA and in Part III of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Schedule?
Answer: The tribal areas in each item of Parts I, II and IIA and in Part III of the table appended to paragraph 20 of this Schedule shall be an autonomous district.

Question: What shall the tribal areas in each item of Parts I, II and IIA and in Part III of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Schedule be?
Answer: The tribal areas in each item of Parts I, II and IIA and in Part III of the table appended to paragraph 20 of this Schedule shall be an autonomous district.

Question: What can the Governor do if there are different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district?
Answer: The Governor may, by public notification, divide the area or areas inhabited by them into autonomous regions.

Question: What action can the Governor take when there are different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district, according to public notification?
Answer: The Governor may divide the area or areas inhabited by them into autonomous regions.

Question: What changes can the Governor make in the table according to the text?
Answer: The Governor may, by public notification, include any area in any of the Parts of the said table, or exclude any area from any of the Parts of the said table.

Question: How can the Governor include or exclude any area in any of the Parts of the said table?
Answer: The Governor may, by public notification, include any area in any of the Parts of the said table, or exclude any area from any of the Parts of the said table.

Question: What can the Governor do with an autonomous district?
Answer: The Governor can create a new autonomous district, increase or diminish the area of any autonomous district, unite two or more autonomous districts or parts thereof to form one autonomous district, alter the name of any autonomous district, and define the boundaries of any autonomous district.

Question: What are the different ways a Governor can modify an autonomous district?
Answer: The Governor can create a new autonomous district, increase or diminish the area of any autonomous district, unite two or more autonomous districts or parts thereof to form one autonomous district, alter the name of any autonomous district, and define the boundaries of any autonomous district.

Question: What is required for the Governor to make an order under clauses (c), (d), (e), and (f)?
Answer: No order shall be made by the Governor under clauses (c), (d), (e), and (f) except after consideration of the report of a Commission appointed under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14 of this Schedule.

Question: Under what conditions can the Governor make an order under clauses (c), (d), (e), and (f)?
Answer: The Governor can make an order under clauses (c), (d), (e), and (f) only after consideration of the report of a Commission appointed under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14 of this Schedule.

Question: What is the exception regarding the application of sub-paragraph (2) to the State of Assam?
Answer: The exception is that sub-paragraph (2) shall not apply to the Bodoland Territorial Areas District.

Question: Where does sub-paragraph (2) not apply in relation to the State of Assam?
Answer: Sub-paragraph (2) does not apply to the Bodoland Territorial Areas District.

Question: What is the constitution of District Councils and Regional Councils?
Answer: There shall be a District Council for each autonomous district consisting of not more than thirty members, of whom not more than four persons shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage. There shall be a separate Regional Council for each area constituted an autonomous region under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 of this Schedule.

Question: How many members can a District Council have in an autonomous district and how are they selected? How is a Regional Council constituted?
Answer: A District Council for each autonomous district can have up to thirty members, with not more than four persons nominated by the Governor and the rest elected on the basis of adult suffrage. A separate Regional Council is constituted for each area recognized as an autonomous region under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 of the Schedule.

Question: What is the corporate name of each District Council and each Regional Council?
Answer: Each District Council and each Regional Council shall be a body corporate by the name respectively of “the District Council of (name of district)” and “the Regional Council of (name of region)”.

Question: What is the body corporate name for the District Council of a specific district and the Regional Council of a specific region?
Answer: The body corporate name for the District Council of a specific district is 'the District Council of (name of district)' and for the Regional Council of a specific region, it is 'the Regional Council of (name of region)'.

Question: Where is the administration of an autonomous district vested if not under the Regional Council?
Answer: In the District Council for such district.

Question: Where is the administration of an autonomous district vested if it's not under the Regional Council?
Answer: In the District Council for such district.

Question: Where is the administration of an autonomous region vested?
Answer: In the Regional Council for such region.

Question: Who is vested with the administration of an autonomous region?
Answer: The Regional Council for such region.

Question: How many members does the Bodoland Territorial Council consist of according to the amendment to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003?
Answer: Not more than forty-six members.

Question: What is the maximum number of members allowed in the Bodoland Territorial Council as per the amendment to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003?
Answer: Not more than forty-six members.

Question: How many members of the Bodoland Territorial Council shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage?
Answer: Forty.

Question: What is the number of members elected through adult suffrage in the Bodoland Territorial Council?
Answer: Forty

Question: How many members of the Bodoland Territorial Council will be nominated by the Governor?
Answer: Six.

Question: Who will nominate the six members of the Bodoland Territorial Council?
Answer: The Governor.

Question: What will the District Council for the North Cachar Hills District be called as per the amendment to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995?
Answer: The North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council.

Question: What is the official name of the autonomous council for the North Cachar Hills District as mentioned in the amendment to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995?
Answer: The North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council

Question: What will the District Council for the Karbi Anglong District be called as per the amendment to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995?
Answer: The Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council.

Question: Under which amendment to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995, is the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council the designated name for the District Council for the Karbi Anglong District?
Answer: The amendment does not specify the name of the act, but it was enacted in 1995.

Question: What is the name of the District Council constituted for the Bodoland Territorial Areas District?
Answer: Bodoland Territorial Council

Question: For which territorial areas district was the Bodoland Territorial Council constituted?
Answer: Bodoland Territorial Areas District

Question: Who makes rules for the first constitution of District Councils and Regional Councils in autonomous districts or regions?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who is responsible for making rules for the first constitution of District Councils and Regional Councils in autonomous districts or regions?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What are some of the provisions included in the rules for the constitution of District and Regional Councils?
Answer: The composition of the Councils, the allocation of seats, the delimitation of territorial constituencies for elections, the qualifications for voting and being elected, the term of office of members, matters relating to elections or nominations, the procedure and conduct of business, and the appointment of officers and staff.

Question: What do the rules for the constitution of District and Regional Councils specify about the composition of the Councils, the allocation of seats, the delimitation of territorial constituencies for elections, the qualifications for voting and being elected, the term of office of members, matters relating to elections or nominations, the procedure and conduct of business, and the appointment of officers and staff?
Answer: These are some of the provisions included in the rules for the constitution of District and Regional Councils.

Question: How long is the term of office for the elected members of the District Council?
Answer: Five years

Question: What is the duration of five years typically associated with in the context of the District Council?
Answer: It is typically associated with the term of office for the elected members of the District Council.

Question: Under what circumstances can the five year term of office for District Council members be extended?
Answer: While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation or if circumstances warrant it.

Question: When can the five year term of office for District Council members be extended?
Answer: Under a Proclamation of Emergency or if circumstances warrant it.

Question: Who can extend the holding of elections if certain circumstances make it impracticable?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who has the power to extend the holding of elections under certain impracticable circumstances?
Answer: The Governor

Question: For what period can the Governor extend the holding of elections?
Answer: A period not exceeding one year at a time

Question: How long can the Governor extend the holding of elections at a time?
Answer: A period not exceeding one year

Question: How long can the extension of the holding of elections last during a Proclamation of Emergency?
Answer: Not extending beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate

Question: What happens six months after a Proclamation of Emergency has ceased to operate?
Answer: The extension of the holding of elections must end

Question: How long does a member elected to fill a casual vacancy hold office?
Answer: Only for the remainder of the term of office of the member whom he replaces

Question: What does a member elected to fill a casual vacancy do for the remainder of the term of office of the member whom he replaces?
Answer: He holds office

Question: Who can make rules regarding the matters specified in sub-paragraph (6)?
Answer: The District or the Regional Council

Question: What can the District or the Regional Council make rules regarding?
Answer: The matters specified in sub-paragraph (6)

Question: What rules can the District or the Regional Council make?
Answer: Rules regarding the formation of subordinate local Councils or Boards and their procedure and the conduct of their business, and generally all matters relating to the transaction of business pertaining to the administration of the district or region

Question: What does the rules regarding the formation of subordinate local Councils or Boards, their procedure and the conduct of their business, and generally all matters relating to the transaction of business pertaining to the administration of the district or region pertain to?
Answer: These rules can be made by the District or the Regional Council

Question: What happens if the District or the Regional Council does not make rules?
Answer: The rules made by the Governor under sub-paragraph (6) will have effect

Question: Who makes the rules under sub-paragraph (6) if the District or the Regional Council does not make them?
Answer: The Governor makes the rules

Question: What powers do the District Councils and Regional Councils have?
Answer: They can make laws

Question: Who has the power to make laws?
Answer: The District Councils and Regional Councils

Question: What amendment was made to Paragraph 3 in its application to the State of Assam?
Answer: Sub-paragraph (3) was substituted as under, “(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3A or sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3B, all laws made under this paragraph or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3A or subparagraph (1) of paragraph 3B shall be submitted forthwith

Question: What is the content of the amendment that substituted Sub-paragraph (3) with regard to the State of Assam?
Answer: The amendment states, “(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3A or sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3B, all laws made under this paragraph or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3A or subparagraph (1) of paragraph 3B shall be submitted forthwith.

Question: By what act was Paragraph 3 amended in its application to the State of Assam?
Answer: The Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2

Question: Which paragraph in its application to the State of Assam was amended by The Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2?
Answer: Paragraph 3

Question: What has been inserted in the application to the State of Assam according to the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2?
Answer: After paragraph 3, a new paragraph has been inserted.

Question: Where has a new paragraph been inserted according to the application to the State of Assam under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2?
Answer: A new paragraph has been inserted after paragraph 3.

Question: What additional powers have been given to the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council?
Answer: They have the power to make laws with respect to industries, communications, preservation, protection and improvement of stock, primary and secondary education, agriculture, fisheries, water, social security and social insurance, employment and unemployment, and flood control schemes.

Question: Which councils have the power to make laws with respect to industries, communications, preservation, protection and improvement of stock, primary and secondary education, agriculture, fisheries, water, social security and social insurance, employment and unemployment, and flood control schemes?
Answer: The North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council have been given these additional powers.

Question: What is specified under the categories of 'communications' in the new powers given to the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council?
Answer: Communications include roads, bridges, ferries and other means of communication not specified in List I of the Seventh Schedule; municipal tramways, ropeways, inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I and List III of the Seventh Schedule with regard to such waterways; vehicles other than mechanically propelled vehicles.

Question: What does 'communications' encompass in the context of the powers given to the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council?
Answer: Communications include roads, bridges, ferries and other means of communication not specified in List I of the Seventh Schedule; municipal tramways, ropeways, inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I and List III of the Seventh Schedule with regard to such waterways; vehicles other than mechanically propelled vehicles.

Question: Which provisions must be subject to the industries power of the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council?
Answer: The provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I of the Seventh Schedule.

Question: To which provisions of the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council's industrial power does entries 7 and 52 of List I of the Seventh Schedule apply?
Answer: These entries must be subject to the industries power of the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council.

Question: What has been inserted in the application to the State of Assam according to the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2?
Answer: After paragraph 3A, a new paragraph has been inserted.

Question: Where in the application to the State of Assam according to the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2 has a new paragraph been inserted?
Answer: After paragraph 3A

Question: What falls under the provisions of entry 60 of List I of the Seventh Schedule?
Answer: Theatre and dramatic performances, cinemas.

Question: Under which entry of List I of the Seventh Schedule do theatre and dramatic performances, cinemas fall?
Answer: Entry 60

Question: What are some of the things that trade and commerce in the production supply and distribution of?
Answer: Food stuffs, cattle fodder, raw cotton and raw jute.

Question: What are food stuffs, cattle fodder, raw cotton and raw jute used in the production supply and distribution of?
Answer: Trade and commerce

Question: Who controls or finances libraries, museums and other similar institutions?
Answer: The State.

Question: Who is responsible for financing and controlling libraries, museums, and other similar institutions?
Answer: The State

Question: What happens to all laws made by the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph that relate to matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule?
Answer: They shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President.

Question: What is the process for laws made by the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council that relate to matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule under paragraph 3 or this paragraph?
Answer: They shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President.

Question: What can the President do when a law is reserved for his consideration?
Answer: The President shall declare either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent therefrom.

Question: What options does the President have when a law is presented for his consideration?
Answer: The President can either assent to the law or withhold his assent.

Question: What happens if the President directs the Governor to return the law to the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council?
Answer: The said Council shall consider the law accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if the law is again passed by the said Council with or without amendment it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration.

Question: What should the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council do if the President directs the Governor to return a law to them, and what happens if the law is passed again with or without amendment?
Answer: If the President directs the Governor to return a law to the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council, the said Council shall consider the law within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message. If the law is again passed by the said Council with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration.

Question: What are the additional powers of the Bodoland Territorial Council according to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003?
Answer: The additional powers of the Bodoland Territorial Council include making laws with respect to agriculture, animal husbandry and veterinary, cooperation, cultural affairs, education, fisheries, flood control for protection of village, food and civil supply, forests, handloom and textile, health and family welfare, intoxicating liquors, opium and derivatives, irrigation, labour and employment, land and revenue, library services, lotteries, theatres, dramatic performances and cinemas, markets and fairs, municipal corporation, museum and archaeology institutions, ancient and historical monuments and records, and panchayat.

Question: What sectors or areas can the Bodoland Territorial Council create laws for according to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council can create laws for agriculture, animal husbandry and veterinary, cooperation, cultural affairs, education, fisheries, flood control for protection of village, food and civil supply, forests, handloom and textile, health and family welfare, intoxicating liquors, opium and derivatives, irrigation, labour and employment, land and revenue, library services, lotteries, theatres, dramatic performances and cinemas, markets and fairs, municipal corporation, museum and archaeology institutions, ancient and historical monuments and records, and panchayat.

Question: In which state does the Bodoland Territorial Council have these additional powers?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council has these additional powers in the state of Assam.

Question: Which territorial council has additional powers in the state of Assam?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council has these additional powers in the state of Assam.

Question: What are some of the areas the Bodoland Territorial Council can make laws on regarding agriculture?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council can make laws on agricultural education and research, protection against pests and prevention of plant diseases.

Question: What can the Bodoland Territorial Council make laws on in relation to agricultural education, research, protection against pests, and prevention of plant diseases?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council can make laws on these areas regarding agriculture.

Question: What powers does the Bodoland Territorial Council have in terms of animal husbandry and veterinary?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council has the power to make laws on preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases, veterinary training and practice, and cattle pounds.

Question: What laws can the Bodoland Territorial Council make on animal husbandry and veterinary?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council can make laws on preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases, veterinary training and practice, and cattle pounds.

Question: What cultural aspects does the Bodoland Territorial Council have the power to legislate?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council has the power to make laws on cultural affairs.

Question: Which body has the power to make laws on cultural affairs in Bodoland?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council has the power to make laws on cultural affairs.

Question: What are the areas of responsibility listed in the text?
Answer: Rural development, planning and development, printing and stationery, public health engineering, public works department, publicity and public relations, registration of births and deaths, relief and rehabilitation, sericulture, small, cottage and rural industry, social Welfare, soil conservation, sports and youth welfare, statistics, tourism, transport, tribal research institute, urban development, weights and measures, and welfare of plain tribes and backward classes.

Question: Are responsibilities such as rural development, planning and development, printing and stationery, public health engineering, public works department, publicity and public relations, registration of births and deaths, relief and rehabilitation, sericulture, small, cottage and rural industry, social Welfare, soil conservation, sports and youth welfare, statistics, tourism, transport, tribal research institute, urban development, weights and measures, and welfare of plain tribes and backward classes listed in the text?
Answer: Yes

Question: What are the provisions regarding the acquisition of land?
Answer: Nothing in such laws shall extinguish or modify the existing rights and privileges of any citizen in respect of his land at the date of commencement of this Act, and no citizen should be disallowed from acquiring land either by way of inheritance, allotment, settlement or by any other way of transfer if such citizen is otherwise eligible for such acquisition of land within the Bodoland Territorial Areas District.

Question: Can a citizen's existing rights and privileges in respect to land be extinguished or modified by any laws? And are there any restrictions on how a citizen can acquire land within the Bodoland Territorial Areas District?
Answer: No, nothing in such laws shall extinguish or modify the existing rights and privileges of any citizen in respect of his land at the date of commencement of this Act. And, no citizen should be disallowed from acquiring land either by way of inheritance, allotment, settlement or by any other way of transfer if such citizen is otherwise eligible for such acquisition of land within the Bodoland Territorial Areas District.

Question: What happens to laws made under paragraph 3 or this paragraph relating to matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule?
Answer: They shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President.

Question: Who should laws made under paragraph 3 or this paragraph relating to matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule be submitted to?
Answer: They should be submitted forthwith to the Governor who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President.

Question: What does the text relate to?
Answer: The text is part of the constitution of India.

Question: What is the text that is part of the constitution of India related to?
Answer: The text is related to the constitution of India.

Question: Who has the power to make laws within the district except those under the authority of Regional Councils?
Answer: The district

Question: Who can create laws within their jurisdiction, excluding those under the authority of Regional Councils?
Answer: The district

Question: What can the laws made by the district pertain to?
Answer: The allotment, occupation or use of land, the management of forests not reserved, the use of canals for agriculture, regulation of shifting cultivation, establishment of village or town committees, village or town administration, appointment or succession of Chiefs, inheritance of property, marriage and divorce, social customs.

Question: What does the allotment, occupation or use of land, the management of forests not reserved, the use of canals for agriculture, regulation of shifting cultivation, establishment of village or town committees, village or town administration, appointment or succession of Chiefs, inheritance of property, marriage and divorce, social customs pertain to?
Answer: These all can pertain to the laws made by the district.

Question: Can these laws prevent compulsory acquisition of land for public purposes?
Answer: No, nothing in such laws shall prevent the compulsory acquisition of any land for public purposes by the Government.

Question: Can the government compulsorily acquire any land for public purposes under these laws?
Answer: Yes, the government can compulsorily acquire any land for public purposes under these laws.

Question: What happens when a law is reserved for the consideration of the President?
Answer: The President shall declare either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent.

Question: What does the President do when a law is reserved for his consideration?
Answer: The President shall declare either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent.

Question: Can the President direct the Governor to return the law to the Bodoand Territorial Council?
Answer: Yes, the President may direct the Governor to return the law to the Bodoland Territorial Council, along with a message requesting reconsideration or amendments.

Question: Who can direct the Governor to return the law to the Bodoland Territorial Council along with a message requesting reconsideration or amendments?
Answer: The President can direct the Governor to return the law to the Bodoland Territorial Council along with a message requesting reconsideration or amendments.

Question: What is the time period for the Council to reconsider a returned law?
Answer: The Council should reconsider the law within a period of six months.

Question: Within what period should the Council reconsider a law that has been returned?
Answer: The Council should reconsider the law within a period of six months.

Question: What is a 'reserved forest' according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: A 'reserved forest' is any area which is a reserved forest under the Assam Forest Regulation, 1891, or under any other law for the time being in force in the area in question.

Question: Under which law or regulation is an area considered a 'reserved forest' in India?
Answer: An area is considered a 'reserved forest' under the Assam Forest Regulation, 1891, or under any other law for the time being in force in the area in question.

Question: What happens to laws made under paragraph 3 of the Constitution of India?
Answer: All laws made under paragraph 3 shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.

Question: To whom shall laws made under paragraph 3 of the Constitution of India be submitted and when do they take effect?
Answer: All laws made under paragraph 3 are submitted forthwith to the Governor and they take effect only after being assented to by him.

Question: Who can constitute village councils or courts for the trial of suits and cases in autonomous regions?
Answer: The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of areas within such region and the District Council for an autonomous district in respect of areas within the district can constitute village councils or courts for the trial of suits and cases.

Question: Who can constitute village councils or courts for the trial of suits and cases in areas within an autonomous region or an autonomous district?
Answer: The Regional Council for an autonomous region and the District Council for an autonomous district can constitute village councils or courts for the trial of suits and cases in areas within such region or district respectively.

Question: Who exercises the powers of a court of appeal in respect of all suits and cases triable by a village council or court?
Answer: The Regional Council for an autonomous region or any court constituted in that behalf by the Regional Council or, if in respect of any area within an autonomous district there is no Regional Council, the District Council for such district, or any court constituted in that behalf by the District Council, shall exercise the powers of a court of appeal.

Question: Who is responsible for exercising the powers of a court of appeal in an area within an autonomous district where there is no Regional Council?
Answer: The District Council for such district, or any court constituted in that behalf by the District Council, is responsible for exercising the powers of a court of appeal.

Question: Which courts have jurisdiction over the suits or cases as mentioned in the text?
Answer: The High Court and the Supreme Court

Question: What suits or cases do the High Court and the Supreme Court have jurisdiction over as mentioned in the text?
Answer: The suits or cases mentioned in the text

Question: What changes have been made to paragraph 4 in its application to the State of Assam?
Answer: The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, inserted a new subparagraph after sub-paragraph (5)

Question: What was inserted after sub-paragraph (5) by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2 with respect to the State of Assam?
Answer: A new subparagraph was inserted in paragraph 4 in its application to the State of Assam.

Question: What is the purpose of the amendment made to paragraph 4 in its application to the State of Assam?
Answer: The amendment states that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council

Question: Which region is specified in the amendment to paragraph 4 as being exempt from its application in the State of Assam?
Answer: The Bodoland Territorial Council

Question: What powers does a Regional Council or District Council have according to paragraph 4?
Answer: They can make rules regulating the constitution of village councils and courts, the procedure to be followed by village councils or courts, the enforcement of decisions and orders of such councils and courts, and all other ancillary matters for the carrying out of the provisions

Question: What responsibilities do Regional Councils or District Councils have in regulating village councils and courts, according to paragraph 4?
Answer: They have the power to make rules regulating the constitution of village councils and courts, the procedure to be followed by village councils or courts, the enforcement of decisions and orders of such councils and courts, and all other ancillary matters for the carrying out of the provisions.

Question: What happens when the President, after consulting the Government of the State concerned, appoints a date in relation to an autonomous district or region?
Answer: The paragraph will have effect in relation to such autonomous district or region as specified in the notification

Question: What is the effect of the President appointing a date for an autonomous district or region after consulting with the State Government?
Answer: The paragraph will have effect in relation to such autonomous district or region as specified in the notification

Question: What was substituted for the words in sub-paragraph (1) regarding parties belonging to Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The words 'not being suits and cases of the nature referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph (5) of this Schedule, which the Governor may specify in this behalf,' had been substituted.

Question: What words were substituted in sub-paragraph (1) for parties belonging to Scheduled Tribes?
Answer: The words 'not being suits and cases of the nature referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph (5) of this Schedule, which the Governor may specify in this behalf,' were substituted.

Question: What happened to sub-paragraphs (2) and (3)?
Answer: Sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) had been omitted.

Question: What was the action taken on sub-paragraphs (2) and (3)?
Answer: They had been omitted.

Question: What was substituted for the words 'A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may with the previous approval of the Governor make rules regulating' in sub-paragraph (4)?
Answer: The words 'the Governor may make rules regulating' had been substituted.

Question: What words had been substituted for 'the Governor may make rules regulating' in sub-paragraph (4)?
Answer: The words 'A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may with the previous approval of the Governor make rules regulating' were substituted.

Question: What was the substituted clause for clause (a) in sub-paragraph (4)?
Answer: The constitution of village councils and courts, the powers to be exercised by them under this paragraph and the courts to which appeals from the decisions of village councils and courts shall lie.

Question: What does the clause (a) in sub-paragraph (4) regarding the constitution of village councils and courts, the powers to be exercised by them under this paragraph and the courts to which appeals from the decisions of village councils and courts shall lie, substitute?
Answer: It was the substituted clause for clause (a) in sub-paragraph (4).

Question: What was the substituted clause for clause (c) in sub-paragraph (4)?
Answer: The transfer of appeals and other proceedings pending before the Regional or District Council or any court constituted by such Council immediately before the date appointed by the President under sub-paragraph (5).

Question: What clause was 'The transfer of appeals and other proceedings pending before the Regional or District Council or any court constituted by such Council immediately before the date appointed by the President under sub-paragraph (5)' used to replace?
Answer: Clause (c) in sub-paragraph (4)

Question: What was substituted in clause (e) in sub-paragraph (4)?
Answer: For the words, brackets and figures 'sub-paragraphs (1) and (2)', the word, brackets and figure 'sub-paragraph (1)' had been substituted.

Question: What were the changes made in clause (e) in sub-paragraph (4)?
Answer: For the words, brackets and figures 'sub-paragraphs (1) and (2)', the word, brackets and figure 'sub-paragraph (1)' had been substituted.

Question: What powers can the Governor confer under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898?
Answer: The Governor may, for the trial of suits or cases arising out of any law in force in any autonomous district or region being a law specified in that behalf by the Governor, or for the trial of offences punishable with death, transportation for life, or imprisonment.

Question: Under what circumstances may the Governor confer powers for the trial of suits or cases, according to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898?
Answer: The Governor may confer powers for the trial of suits or cases arising out of any law in force in any autonomous district or region being a law specified in that behalf by the Governor, or for the trial of offences punishable with death, transportation for life, or imprisonment.

Question: What powers can the Governor confer on the District Council or the Regional Council under the Indian Penal Code?
Answer: The Governor can confer on the District Council or the Regional Council powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981, as he deems appropriate.

Question: Under which codes can the Governor confer powers on the District Council or the Regional Council, according to the Indian Penal Code?
Answer: The Governor can confer powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981.

Question: Can the Governor withdraw or modify any of the powers conferred on a District Council, Regional Council, court or officer?
Answer: Yes, the Governor may withdraw or modify any of the powers conferred on a District Council, Regional Council, court or officer.

Question: Who has the authority to withdraw or modify any of the powers conferred on a District Council, Regional Council, court or officer?
Answer: The Governor has the authority to withdraw or modify any of the powers conferred on a District Council, Regional Council, court or officer.

Question: Do the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981, apply to the trial of any suits, cases or offences in an autonomous district or in any autonomous region?
Answer: Except as expressly provided in this paragraph, the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981, shall not apply to the trial of any suits, cases or offences in an autonomous district or in any autonomous region.

Question: Do the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981, apply to the trial of any suits, cases or offences in an autonomous district or in any autonomous region without any express provision?
Answer: No, the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981, do not apply to the trial of any suits, cases or offences in an autonomous district or in any autonomous region without any express provision.

Question: What cannot be done on and from the date appointed by the President in relation to any autonomous district or autonomous region?
Answer: On and from the date appointed by the President, nothing contained in this paragraph shall be deemed to authorise the Governor to confer on the District Council or Regional Council or on courts constituted by the District Council any of the powers referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.

Question: What is the implication of the date appointed by the President in relation to an autonomous district or region on the powers of the District Council, Regional Council, or courts constituted by the District Council?
Answer: On and from the date appointed by the President, nothing contained in this paragraph shall be deemed to authorise the Governor to confer on the District Council or Regional Council or on courts constituted by the District Council any of the powers referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.

Question: What powers does the District Council for an autonomous district have?
Answer: The District Council for an autonomous district may establish, construct, or manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets, cattle pounds, ferries, fisheries, roads, road transport and waterways in the district.

Question: What establishments and services may the District Council for an autonomous district establish, construct, or manage?
Answer: The District Council for an autonomous district may establish, construct, or manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets, cattle pounds, ferries, fisheries, roads, road transport and waterways in the district.

Question: Who can make regulations for the regulation and control of primary education in the district?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who has the authority to make regulations for the regulation and control of primary education in the district?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What functions may the Governor entrust to the District Council or its officers?
Answer: Functions in relation to agriculture, animal husbandry, community projects, cooperative societies, social welfare, village planning or any other matter to which the executive power of the State extends.

Question: In relation to which areas can the District Council or its officers be entrusted with functions by the Governor?
Answer: The Governor may entrust functions to the District Council or its officers in relation to agriculture, animal husbandry, community projects, cooperative societies, social welfare, village planning or any other matter to which the executive power of the State extends.

Question: What funds are constituted for each autonomous district and region?
Answer: A District Fund and a Regional Fund

Question: What are the names of the funds constituted for an autonomous district and region?
Answer: A District Fund and a Regional Fund

Question: Who may make rules for the management of the District Fund or the Regional Fund?
Answer: The Governor

Question: What role is responsible for making rules for the management of the District Fund or the Regional Fund?
Answer: The Governor

Question: In what form shall the accounts of the District Council or the Regional Council be kept?
Answer: In such form as the Comptroller and Auditor General of India may, with the approval of the President, prescribe.

Question: Who prescribes the form in which the accounts of the District Council or the Regional Council are to be kept?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor General of India, with the approval of the President, prescribes the form.

Question: Who audits the accounts of the District and Regional Councils?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General

Question: What role does The Comptroller and Auditor-General play for the District and Regional Councils?
Answer: The Comptroller and Auditor-General audits the accounts of the District and Regional Councils.

Question: Who submits the audit reports of District and Regional Councils' accounts to?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who receives the audit reports of District and Regional Councils' accounts?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who has the power to assess and collect revenue in respect of lands within an autonomous region or district?
Answer: The Regional Council for an autonomous region and the District Council for an autonomous district have the power to assess and collect revenue in respect of lands within such region or district.

Question: Who has the power to assess and collect revenue in respect of lands within an autonomous region and an autonomous district?
Answer: The Regional Council for an autonomous region and the District Council for an autonomous district.

Question: What power does the Regional Council for an autonomous region and the District Council for an autonomous district have in respect of areas within such region and district?
Answer: They have power to levy and collect taxes on lands and buildings, and tolls on persons resident within such areas.

Question: What can the Regional Council for an autonomous region and the District Council for an autonomous district do on lands and buildings, and on persons resident within such areas?
Answer: They have power to levy and collect taxes on lands and buildings, and tolls on persons resident within such areas.

Question: What taxes can the District Council for an autonomous district levy and collect within the district?
Answer: The District Council can levy and collect taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments; taxes on animals, vehicles and boats; taxes on the entry of goods into a market for sale therein, and tolls on passengers and goods carried in ferries; taxes for the maintenance of schools, dispensaries or roads, and taxes on entertainment and amusements.

Question: What are the various types of taxes that a District Council in an autonomous district can levy and collect?
Answer: A District Council in an autonomous district can levy and collect taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments; taxes on animals, vehicles and boats; taxes on the entry of goods into a market for sale therein, and tolls on passengers and goods carried in ferries; taxes for the maintenance of schools, dispensaries or roads, and taxes on entertainment and amusements.

Question: What happens to the regulations made by a Regional Council or District Council for the levy and collection of taxes?
Answer: These regulations shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.

Question: What happens to the regulations made by a Regional Council or District Council for the levy and collection of taxes before the Governor assents to them?
Answer: These regulations shall have no effect until assented to by the Governor.

Question: What are licences or leases for the purpose of prospecting for, or extraction of, minerals related to?
Answer: They relate to the share of the royalties accruing each year from these licences or leases.

Question: What do the share of royalties accruing each year from licences or leases for prospecting for, or extraction of, minerals relate to?
Answer: They relate to the licences or leases for the purpose of prospecting for, or extraction of, minerals.

Question: What happens if a dispute arises over the share of royalties to be made over to a District Council?
Answer: If a dispute arises, it is referred to the Governor for determination. The amount determined by the Governor is deemed to be the amount payable and the decision of the Governor is final.

Question: Who determines the amount payable in case of a dispute over the share of royalties to be made over to a District Council and is their decision final?
Answer: In case of a dispute, the amount payable is determined by the Governor and their decision is final.

Question: What amendment was made in Paragraph 9 in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram?
Answer: The amendment was made by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988, to insert a sub-paragraph stating that the Governor may direct that the share of royalties to be made over to a District Council shall be made over to that Council within a year from the date of any agreement or determination.

Question: What does the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988, state about the share of royalties made over to a District Council in the States of Tripura and Mizoram?
Answer: The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988, states that the Governor may direct that the share of royalties to be made over to a District Council shall be made over to that Council within a year from the date of any agreement or determination. This amendment was made in Paragraph 9 in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram.

Question: What power does the District Council of an autonomous district have in terms of money-lending and trading?
Answer: The District Council can make regulations for the regulation and control of money-lending or trading within the district by persons other than Scheduled Tribes resident in the district.

Question: Who can the District Council regulate and control in terms of money-lending and trading within the district?
Answer: The District Council can regulate and control money-lending or trading by persons other than Scheduled Tribes resident in the district.

Question: What can such regulations for the control of money-lending and trading by non-tribals prescribe or provide for?
Answer: The regulations may prescribe that no one except the holder of a license shall carry on the business of money-lending, prescribe the maximum rate of interest which may be charged or recovered by a money-lender, and provide for the maintenance of accounts by money-lenders and for the inspection of such accounts.

Question: What can the regulations for non-tribal money-lending and trading potentially include?
Answer: The regulations may include that only a license holder can carry on the business, a maximum rate of interest that can be charged or recovered by a money-lender, and provisions for the maintenance and inspection of accounts by money-lenders.

Question: Who can carry on wholesale or retail business in any commodity according to the original regulations?
Answer: Only a member of the Scheduled Tribes resident in the district

Question: Who is allowed to carry on wholesale or retail business in any commodity according to the original regulations, if they are a resident of the district?
Answer: Only a member of the Scheduled Tribes

Question: Under what conditions can this business be carried out?
Answer: Under a licence issued by the District Council

Question: Who issues the license for carrying out this business?
Answer: The District Council

Question: What is the requirement for making regulations under this paragraph?
Answer: They have to be passed by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the total membership of the District Council

Question: What is the voting requirement for the District Council to pass regulations under this paragraph?
Answer: A majority of not less than three-fourths of the total membership of the District Council is required.

Question: Can a license be refused to a money-lender or trader who has been doing business before the regulations were made?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible for a money-lender or trader who has been doing business before the regulations were made to be refused a license?
Answer: No

Question: What are the changes made to paragraph 10 in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram?
Answer: The words 'by non-tribals' and 'other than Scheduled Tribes' have been omitted and clause (d) has been replaced with 'prescribe that no person resident in the district shall carry on any trade, whether wholesale or retail, except under a licence issued in that behalf by the District Council.'

Question: What is the replacement for clause (d) in paragraph 10 as it applies to the States of Tripura and Mizoram, and which phrases have been omitted?
Answer: Clause (d) has been replaced with 'prescribe that no person resident in the district shall carry on any trade, whether wholesale or retail, except under a licence issued in that behalf by the District Council.' The words 'by non-tribals' and 'other than Scheduled Tribes' have been omitted.

Question: What is the amendment made to paragraph 10 in its application to the State of Assam?
Answer: A new sub-paragraph was inserted stating that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.

Question: What does the amendment to paragraph 10 in its application to the State of Assam, regarding the Bodoland Territorial Council, state?
Answer: A new sub-paragraph was inserted stating that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.

Question: What happens to all regulations made under this paragraph?
Answer: They shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.

Question: To whom are all regulations made under a certain paragraph submitted and when do they take effect?
Answer: They are submitted forthwith to the Governor and take effect only after his assent.

Question: Where should all laws, rules and regulations made under this Schedule by a District Council or a Regional Council be published?
Answer: In the Official Gazette of the State.

Question: Where are all laws, rules and regulations made under the Schedule by a District Council or a Regional Council published?
Answer: In the Official Gazette of the State.

Question: What happens to the laws, rules and regulations once they are published in the Official Gazette of the State?
Answer: They have the force of law.

Question: What does it mean for the laws, rules and regulations when they are published in the Official Gazette of the State?
Answer: It means they have the force of law.

Question: Can any Act of the Legislature of the State of Assam apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region in that State?
Answer: No, unless the District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs.

Question: What is required for an Act of the Legislature of the State of Assam to apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region in that State?
Answer: The District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region must direct so by public notification.

Question: What power does the Governor have regarding the application of any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State of Assam?
Answer: The Governor may, by public notification, direct that any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State of Assam shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State, or shall apply to such district or region or any part thereof subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify in the notification.

Question: What action can the Governor take to modify the application of an Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State of Assam to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State?
Answer: The Governor may, by public notification, direct that any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State of Assam shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State, or shall apply to such district or region or any part thereof subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify in the notification.

Question: What amendment was made to Paragraph 12 related to its application to the State of Assam?
Answer: Paragraph 12 has been amended by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s.2.

Question: What was the amendment made to Paragraph 12 by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s.2?
Answer: The amendment was related to its application to the State of Assam.

Question: What change was made to paragraph 12 by the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003?
Answer: In paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (1), in clause (a), for the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A of this Schedule”, the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A or paragraph 3B of this Schedule” shall be substituted.

Question: What substitution was made in paragraph 12, sub-paragraph (1), clause (a) by the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003?
Answer: For the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A of this Schedule”, the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A or paragraph 3B of this Schedule” were substituted.

Question: What happens if a law made by a District or Regional Council in the State of Meghalaya is repugnant to any provision of a law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya?
Answer: The law or regulation made by the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regional Council whether made before or after the law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya, shall, to the extent of repugnancy, be void and the law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya shall prevail.

Question: What is the consequence if a law or regulation made by the District or Regional Council in Meghalaya conflicts with a law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya?
Answer: The law or regulation made by the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regional Council, shall, to the extent of the conflict, be void and the law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya shall prevail.

Question: What power does the President have with respect to any Act of Parliament towards an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Meghalaya?
Answer: The President may, by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Meghalaya, or shall apply to such district or region.

Question: What can the President do regarding the application of an Act of Parliament to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Meghalaya?
Answer: The President may, by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Meghalaya, or shall apply to such district or region.

Question: What is stated in the 12AA of the Constitution of India regarding the application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of the State of Tripura to the autonomous districts and regions?
Answer: The 12AA of the Constitution of India states that notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura in respect of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic liquor shall apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region in that State unless, in either case the District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs. The Governor may, by public notification, direct that any Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura to which the provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply, shall not apply to the autonomous district or any autonomous region in that State, or shall apply to that district or such region, or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or modifications, as he may specify in the notification. The President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, by notification, direct that it shall not apply to the autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Tripura, or shall apply to such district or region or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify in the notification.

Question: What does the 12AA of the Constitution of India state about the application of Acts of the Legislature of the State of Tripura and Acts of Parliament to the autonomous districts and regions in Tripura?
Answer: The 12AA of the Constitution of India states that notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura in respect of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic liquor shall apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region in that State unless, in either case the District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs. The Governor may, by public notification, direct that any Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura to which the provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply, shall not apply to the autonomous district or any autonomous region in that State, or shall apply to that district or such region, or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or modifications, as he may specify in the notification. The President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, by notification, direct that it shall not apply to the autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Tripura, or shall apply to such district or region or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify in the notification.

Question: Who has the authority to direct that an Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura may not apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region?
Answer: The Governor has the authority to direct that an Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura may not apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region.

Question: Who has the authority to direct that an Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura may not apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who can specify exceptions or modifications to any Act of Parliament in its application to the autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Tripura?
Answer: The President can specify exceptions or modifications to any Act of Parliament in its application to the autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Tripura.

Question: Who has the power to specify exceptions or modifications to any Act of Parliament as it applies to the autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Tripura?
Answer: The President

Question: Who can decide if an Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura applies to an autonomous district or region?
Answer: The District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region can decide if an Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura applies to an autonomous district or region.

Question: Who has the authority to decide if an Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura applies to an autonomous district or region?
Answer: The District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region.

Question: Who can direct that an Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who has the authority to decide that an Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram doesn't apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Under what conditions does an Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram not apply to an autonomous district or autonomous region in that State?
Answer: The Act does not apply unless the District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region, by public notification, so directs.

Question: What needs to happen for an Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram to apply to an autonomous district or autonomous region in that State?
Answer: The Act will apply only if the District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region, by public notification, so directs.

Question: Who can make modifications to an Act of Parliament's application to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Mizoram?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to make modifications to an Act of Parliament's application to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Mizoram?
Answer: The President

Question: Can modifications or exceptions made to an Act of Parliament's application to an autonomous district or region in Mizoram have retrospective effect?
Answer: Yes

Question: Is it possible for modifications or exceptions made to an Act of Parliament's application to an autonomous district or region in Mizoram to have retrospective effect?
Answer: Yes

Question: What is specified in paragraph 3 of the Schedule?
Answer: It specifies matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council may make laws.

Question: Which paragraph of the Schedule specifies the matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council may make laws?
Answer: Paragraph 3 of the Schedule specifies this.

Question: What has to be done before the estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to an autonomous district are credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: They shall be first placed before the District Council for discussion.

Question: What needs to be done with the estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to an autonomous district before they are credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: They shall be first placed before the District Council for discussion.

Question: What can the Governor do in relation to the administration of autonomous districts and regions?
Answer: The Governor may appoint a Commission to examine and report on any matter relating to the administration of the autonomous districts and regions, including matters specified in certain clauses of paragraph 1 of the schedule. The Governor may also appoint a Commission to inquire into and report on the administration of autonomous districts and regions generally and on certain specific matters.

Question: What powers does the Governor have in terms of appointing Commissions related to the administration of autonomous districts and regions?
Answer: The Governor may appoint a Commission to examine and report on any matter relating to the administration of the autonomous districts and regions, including matters specified in certain clauses of paragraph 1 of the schedule. The Governor may also appoint a Commission to inquire into and report on the administration of autonomous districts and regions generally and on certain specific matters.

Question: What are some of the specific matters the Commission may inquire into and report on?
Answer: The provision of educational and medical facilities and communications in such districts and regions, the need for any new or special legislation in respect of such districts and regions, and the administration of the laws, rules and regulations made by the District and Regional Councils.

Question: What responsibilities do the District and Regional Councils have in terms of the administration of laws, rules and regulations, and what are some areas they may need special legislation for?
Answer: The District and Regional Councils are responsible for the administration of the laws, rules and regulations. They may need new or special legislation for specific matters like the provision of educational and medical facilities and communications in certain districts and regions. These matters can be inquired into and reported on by the Commission.

Question: What happens after the report of the Commission is completed?
Answer: The report of the Commission, with the recommendations of the Governor, shall be laid before the Legislature of the State by the Minister concerned together with an explanatory memorandum regarding the action proposed to be taken thereon by the Government of the State.

Question: What is the procedure followed by the Government of the State once the Commission's report is completed and the Governor's recommendations are received?
Answer: The report of the Commission, with the recommendations of the Governor, shall be laid before the Legislature of the State by the Minister concerned together with an explanatory memorandum regarding the action proposed to be taken thereon by the Government of the State.

Question: What role can the Governor assign to one of his Ministers in relation to the autonomous districts and regions?
Answer: The Governor may place one of his Ministers specially in charge of the welfare of the autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State.

Question: Who may the Governor place in charge of the welfare of the autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State?
Answer: The Governor may place one of his Ministers in charge of the welfare of the autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State.

Question: What change was made to paragraph 14's application to Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995?
Answer: The words 'with the recommendations of the Governor with respect thereto' were omitted.

Question: Which words were omitted from paragraph 14's application to Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995?
Answer: The words 'with the recommendations of the Governor with respect thereto' were omitted.

Question: What can the Governor do if an act or resolution of a District or Regional Council is likely to endanger the safety of India or is prejudicial to public order?
Answer: The Governor may annul or suspend such act or resolution and take such steps as he may consider necessary, including the suspension of the Council and the assumption to himself of all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Council.

Question: What actions can the Governor take if he finds an act or resolution of a District or Regional Council to be endangering the safety of India or prejudicial to public order?
Answer: The Governor may annul or suspend such act or resolution and take such steps as he may consider necessary, including the suspension of the Council and the assumption to himself of all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Council.

Question: What happens to an order made by the Governor under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15?
Answer: The order, along with the reasons for it, shall be laid before the Legislature of the State as soon as possible. The order will continue in force for a period of twelve months from the date it was made, unless revoked by the Legislature of the State.

Question: How long does an order made by the Governor under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 stay in force, and where should it be presented?
Answer: The order stays in force for a period of twelve months from the date it was made and should be laid before the Legislature of the State as soon as possible.

Question: Under what conditions can the Governor dissolve a District or a Regional Council?
Answer: The Governor can dissolve a District or a Regional Council on the recommendation of a Commission appointed under paragraph 14 of the Schedule.

Question: On whose recommendation can the Governor dissolve a District or a Regional Council?
Answer: The Governor can dissolve a District or a Regional Council on the recommendation of a Commission appointed under paragraph 14 of the Schedule.

Question: What happens after the dissolution of a District or a Regional Council?
Answer: The Governor may direct that a fresh general election be held immediately for the reconstitution of the Council.

Question: Who may direct that a fresh general election be held immediately for the reconstitution of a Council after its dissolution?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Which paragraph was amended in its application to the states of Tripura and Mizoram in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution Amendment Act, 1988?
Answer: Paragraph 15

Question: What happened to Paragraph 15 in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution Amendment Act, 1988 in relation to the states of Tripura and Mizoram?
Answer: It was amended.

Question: What was the amendment made to paragraph 15?
Answer: In the opening paragraph, the words 'by the Legislature of the State' were substituted with 'by him', and the proviso was omitted.

Question: What changes were made in the opening paragraph of paragraph 15, specifically regarding the use of 'by the Legislature of the State' and the proviso?
Answer: 'By the Legislature of the State' was substituted with 'by him', and the proviso was omitted.

Question: Which other paragraph was amended in its application to the states of Tripura and Mizoram in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution Amendment Act, 1988?
Answer: Paragraph 16

Question: In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution Amendment Act, 1988, which paragraph's application to the states of Tripura and Mizoram was amended?
Answer: Paragraph 16

Question: What was the amendment made to paragraph 16?
Answer: In sub-paragraph (1), the words 'subject to the previous approval of the Legislature of the State' occurring in clause (b), and the second proviso were omitted. For sub-paragraph (3), a new sub-paragraph was substituted stating that every order made under sub-paragraph (1) or sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, along with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the Legislature of the State.

Question: What changes were made to sub-paragraph (1) and sub-paragraph (3) in paragraph 16?
Answer: In sub-paragraph (1), the words 'subject to the previous approval of the Legislature of the State' occurring in clause (b), and the second proviso were omitted. For sub-paragraph (3), a new sub-paragraph was substituted stating that every order made under sub-paragraph (1) or sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, along with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the Legislature of the State.

Question: What actions are subject to the previous approval of the Legislature of the State in the context of the administration of the area under the authority of a Council?
Answer: The Governor can assume the administration of the area under the authority of such Council himself or place the administration of such area under the Commission appointed under the said paragraph or any other body considered suitable by him for a period not exceeding twelve months.

Question: Who can assume the administration of the area under the authority of a Council and for what period of time, according to the approval of the Legislature of the State?
Answer: The Governor can assume the administration of the area under the authority of such Council himself or place the administration of such area under the Commission appointed under the said paragraph or any other body considered suitable by him for a period not exceeding twelve months.

Question: What actions can the Governor take with regard to the administration of the area in question pending the reconstitution of the Council on fresh general election?
Answer: When an order under clause (a) of this paragraph has been made, the Governor may take the action referred to in clause (b) of this paragraph.

Question: What can the Governor do when an order under clause (a) of this paragraph has been made?
Answer: The Governor may take the action referred to in clause (b) of this paragraph with regard to the administration of the area in question pending the reconstitution of the Council on fresh general election.

Question: What conditions must be met before action can be taken under clause (b) of this paragraph?
Answer: No action can be taken under clause (b) of this paragraph without giving the District or the Regional Council, as the case may be, an opportunity of placing its views before the Legislature of the State.

Question: Who must be given an opportunity to place their views before the State Legislature before action can be taken under clause (b) of this paragraph?
Answer: The District or the Regional Council, as the case may be, must be given an opportunity.

Question: What can the Governor do if the administration of an autonomous district cannot be carried out according to the provisions of this Schedule?
Answer: The Governor may, by public notification, assume to himself all or any of the functions or powers vested in or exercisable by the District Council or the Regional Council and declare that such functions or powers shall be exercisable by such person or authority as he may specify, for a period not exceeding six months.

Question: What action can the Governor take when the administration of an autonomous district is not functioning according to provisions, and for how long can this action be implemented?
Answer: The Governor may, by public notification, assume to himself all or any of the functions or powers vested in or exercisable by the District Council or the Regional Council and declare that such functions or powers shall be exercisable by such person or authority as he may specify, for a period not exceeding six months.

Question: Can the period of the Governor's assumption of powers be extended?
Answer: Yes, the Governor may by a further order or orders extend the operation of the initial order by a period not exceeding six months on each occasion.

Question: By how much can the Governor extend the operation of the initial order on each occasion?
Answer: The Governor may extend the operation of the initial order by a period not exceeding six months on each occasion.

Question: What happens to the order made under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph?
Answer: Every order made under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the Legislature of the State and shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the State Legislature first sits after the issue of the order, unless, before the expiry of that period it has been approved by that State Legislature.

Question: What is the procedure and validity period for an order made under sub-paragraph (2) of a given paragraph?
Answer: An order made under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph is laid before the Legislature of the State with the reasons for it. It ceases to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the State Legislature first sits after the issue of the order, unless it has been approved by the State Legislature before that period ends.

Question: What can the Governor declare regarding areas within an autonomous district for the purposes of elections to the Legislative Assembly?
Answer: The Governor may by order declare that any area within an autonomous district in the State of Assam or Meghalaya or Tripura or Mizoram, shall not form part of any constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly reserved for any such district but shall form part of a constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly not so reserved to be specified in the order.

Question: Which states may a Governor order to declare that any area within an autonomous district shall not form part of any constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly reserved for any such district but shall form part of a constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly not so reserved to be specified in the order?
Answer: The Governor may make such an order for the autonomous districts in the states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, or Mizoram.

Question: What amendment was made to Paragraph 17 in its application to the State of Assam?
Answer: Paragraph 17 was amended to insert the following proviso: 'Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Areas District.'

Question: To which territorial area does the amendment to Paragraph 17 not apply in the State of Assam?
Answer: The amendment to Paragraph 17 does not apply to the Bodoland Territorial Areas District.

Question: Who is responsible for constituting a District Council for each autonomous district in the State under this Constitution?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who constitutes a District Council for each autonomous district in the State under the Constitution?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who administers an autonomous district until a District Council is constituted for it?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who is responsible for administering an autonomous district until a District Council is constituted for it?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Can an Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State apply to any such area without specific direction?
Answer: No

Question: Is it possible for an Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State to apply to any such area without specific direction?
Answer: No

Question: Who can make regulations for the peace and good government of any such area?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Who is responsible for making regulations for the peace and good government of an area?
Answer: The Governor

Question: Can a direction given by the Governor under clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) have retrospective effect?
Answer: Yes

Question: Is it possible for a direction given by the Governor under clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) to have retrospective effect?
Answer: Yes

Question: Who needs to assent to regulations made under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) for them to take effect?
Answer: The President

Question: Who has the authority to assent to regulations made under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) for them to take effect?
Answer: The President

Question: What amendment was made to Paragraph 19 in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003?
Answer: The amendment inserted a new subparagraph after sub-paragraph (3) stating that an Interim Executive Council for Bodoland Territorial Areas District in Assam shall be formed by the Governor from amongst leaders of the Bodo movement.

Question: Which amendment to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003, led to the formation of an Interim Executive Council for Bodoland Territorial Areas District in Assam by the Governor from amongst leaders of the Bodo movement?
Answer: The amendment to Paragraph 19 in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule.

Question: What does the 'Memorandum of Settlement' refer to?
Answer: The 'Memorandum of Settlement' refers to the Memorandum signed on the 10th day of February, 2003 between Government of India, Government of Assam and Bodo Liberation Tigers.

Question: Who signed the Memorandum on the 10th day of February, 2003?
Answer: The Memorandum, known as 'Memorandum of Settlement', was signed by the Government of India, Government of Assam and Bodo Liberation Tigers.

Question: What is the duration of the Interim Council as per the Memorandum of Settlement?
Answer: The duration of the Interim Council as per the Memorandum of Settlement is for a period of six months.

Question: For how long is the Interim Council established according to the Memorandum of Settlement?
Answer: The Interim Council is established for a period of six months according to the Memorandum of Settlement.

Question: Which areas are designated as tribal areas within the State of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: The areas specified in Parts I, II, IIA and III of the table are respectively the tribal areas within the State of Assam, the State of Meghalaya, the State of Tripura and the State of Mizoram.

Question: What does the Constitution of India specify about the tribal areas in Parts I, II, IIA and III of the table within the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram?
Answer: The areas specified in Parts I, II, IIA and III of the table are respectively the tribal areas within the State of Assam, the State of Meghalaya, the State of Tripura and the State of Mizoram.

Question: How is any reference to any district in Part I, II or III of the table to be understood?
Answer: Any reference to any district in Part I, II or III of the table is to be construed as a reference to the territories comprised within the autonomous district of that name existing immediately before the day appointed under clause (b) of section 2 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.

Question: What does the reference to any district in Part I, II or III of the table in the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 refer to?
Answer: It is to be construed as a reference to the territories comprised within the autonomous district of that name existing immediately before the day appointed under clause (b) of section 2.

Question: What does the reference to the 'Tripura Tribal Areas District' in Part IIA of the table signify?
Answer: The reference to the 'Tripura Tribal Areas District' in Part IIA of the table is construed as a reference to the territory comprising the tribal areas specified in the First Schedule to the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council Act, 1979.

Question: What does the reference to the territory comprising the tribal areas specified in the First Schedule to the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council Act, 1979 signify?
Answer: The reference to this territory is construed as a reference to the 'Tripura Tribal Areas District' in Part IIA of the table.

Question: Which areas are part of the Khasi Hills District as per the Constitution of India?
Answer: For the purposes of certain clauses and paragraphs of the Schedule, no part of the area comprised within the municipality of Shillong shall be deemed to be within the Khasi Hills District.

Question: According to the Constitution of India, is the area within the municipality of Shillong considered part of the Khasi Hills District for certain clauses and paragraphs of the Schedule?
Answer: No, for the purposes of certain clauses and paragraphs of the Schedule, no part of the area comprised within the municipality of Shillong shall be deemed to be within the Khasi Hills District.

Question: What districts are specified in Part I of the table?
Answer: The districts specified in Part I of the table are The North Cachar Hills District, The Karbi Anglong District, and The Bodoland Territorial Area District.

Question: Which part of the table specifies The North Cachar Hills District, The Karbi Anglong District, and The Bodoland Territorial Area District?
Answer: Part I of the table specifies The North Cachar Hills District, The Karbi Anglong District, and The Bodoland Territorial Area District.

Question: What districts are specified in Part II of the table?
Answer: The districts specified in Part II of the table are Khasi Hills District, Jaintia Hills District, and The Garo Hills District.

Question: Which part of the table specifies Khasi Hills District, Jaintia Hills District, and The Garo Hills District?
Answer: Khasi Hills District, Jaintia Hills District, and The Garo Hills District are specified in Part II of the table.

Question: What is the Chakma District?
Answer: The Chakma District is a district mentioned in THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

Question: In which document is the Chakma District mentioned?
Answer: The Chakma District is mentioned in THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

Question: What is the Mara District?
Answer: The Mara District is a district mentioned in THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

Question: Where is the Mara District mentioned?
Answer: The Mara District is mentioned in THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

Question: What is the Lai District?
Answer: The Lai District is a district mentioned in THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

Question: Where is the Lai District mentioned?
Answer: The Lai District is mentioned in THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

Question: What happens to the Mizo District Council according to the constitution?
Answer: According to the constitution, the Mizo District Council shall stand dissolved and cease to exist. The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram may provide for the transfer of the assets, rights and liabilities of the Mizo District Council to the Union or to any other authority; the substitution of the Union or any other authority for the Mizo District Council; the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the Mizo District Council; the continuance of any laws, made by the Mizo District Council and in force immediately before its dissolution, subject to such adaptations and modifications, as the Administrator may make in this behalf, until such laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.

Question: What will the Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram provide for after the dissolution of the Mizo District Council according to the constitution? What will happen to the laws made by the Mizo District Council?
Answer: After the dissolution of the Mizo District Council, the Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram may provide for the transfer of the assets, rights and liabilities of the Mizo District Council to the Union or to any other authority; the substitution of the Union or any other authority for the Mizo District Council; the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the Mizo District Council. The laws made by the Mizo District Council and in force immediately before its dissolution will continue, subject to such adaptations and modifications, as the Administrator may make in this behalf, until such laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.

Question: What is the 'prescribed date' referred to in the constitution?
Answer: In the constitution, the 'prescribed date' refers to the date on which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram is duly constituted under and in accordance with the provisions of the Government of Union Territories Act.

Question: Under and in accordance with the provisions of the Government of Union Territories Act, what does the 'prescribed date' in the constitution refer to?
Answer: The 'prescribed date' in the constitution refers to the date on which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram is duly constituted.

Question: What happens to every autonomous region in the Union territory of Mizoram existing before the prescribed date according to the Constitution of India?
Answer: Every autonomous region existing before the prescribed date in the Union territory of Mizoram shall, on and from that date, be an autonomous district in that Union territory. The Administrator thereof may direct that necessary amendments be made to give effect to this clause.

Question: What is the status and who has the authority to make amendments, according to the Constitution of India, for autonomous regions in the Union territory of Mizoram that existed before a certain prescribed date?
Answer: Every autonomous region that existed before the prescribed date in the Union territory of Mizoram becomes an autonomous district on and from that date. The Administrator of the Union territory has the authority to make necessary amendments to give effect to this clause.

Question: What happens to every Regional Council of an autonomous region in the Union territory of Mizoram existing before the prescribed date?
Answer: Every Regional Council of an autonomous region in the Union territory of Mizoram existing immediately before the prescribed date shall, on and from that date and until a District Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district, be deemed to be the District Council of that district.

Question: What is the status of the Regional Council of an autonomous region in the Union territory of Mizoram existing immediately before the prescribed date until a District Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district?
Answer: Every Regional Council of an autonomous region in the Union territory of Mizoram existing immediately before the prescribed date shall, on and from that date and until a District Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district, be deemed to be the District Council of that district.

Question: What is the change in paragraph 20B in the Constitution of India in its application to the State of Assam?
Answer: After paragraph 20B, a new paragraph 20BA has been inserted, which discusses the exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the discharge of his functions.

Question: What update was made to the Constitution of India's paragraph 20B in relation to the State of Assam?
Answer: After paragraph 20B, a new paragraph 20BA has been inserted, which discusses the exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the discharge of his functions.

Question: What action is to be taken after consulting the Council of Ministers and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council?
Answer: The action that the governor considers necessary in his discretion.

Question: After consulting the Council of Ministers and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council, whose discretion is it to consider the necessary action to be taken?
Answer: It is the governor's discretion to consider the necessary action to be taken.

Question: What was inserted after paragraph 20B in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram?
Answer: The following paragraph has been inserted: '20BB. Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the discharge of his functions.'

Question: Where was the '20BB. Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the discharge of his functions' paragraph inserted in its application to the States?
Answer: It was inserted after paragraph 20B in the States of Tripura and Mizoram.

Question: What action should the Governor take after consulting the Council of Ministers and the District Council or the Regional Council concerned?
Answer: The Governor should take such action as he considers necessary in his discretion.

Question: In whose discretion should the Governor take necessary action after consulting the Council of Ministers and the District Council or the Regional Council concerned?
Answer: The Governor should take such action in his own discretion.

Question: What happens to every member, whether elected or nominated, of an existing Regional Council?
Answer: They shall be deemed to have been elected or, as the case may be, nominated to the corresponding new District Council and shall hold office until a District Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district under this Schedule.

Question: What is the status of every member of an existing Regional Council, whether elected or nominated, when a corresponding new District Council is formed under this Schedule?
Answer: They shall be deemed to have been elected or, as the case may be, nominated to the corresponding new District Council and shall hold office until a District Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district.

Question: What happens until rules are made under sub-paragraph (7) of paragraph 2 and subparagraph (4) of paragraph 4 of this Schedule by the corresponding new District Council?
Answer: Until these rules are made, the rules made under the said provisions by the existing Regional Council will continue to apply.

Question: What will continue to apply until the rules are made under sub-paragraph (7) of paragraph 2 and subparagraph (4) of paragraph 4 of this Schedule by the new District Council?
Answer: The rules made under the said provisions by the existing Regional Council will continue to apply until these rules are made.

Question: Who has the authority to make adaptations and modifications in relation to the new District Council in the Union territory of Mizoram?
Answer: The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram

Question: Who holds the responsibility for making adaptations and modifications in the new District Council in Mizoram?
Answer: The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram

Question: What matters can the Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram provide for?
Answer: The transfer in whole or in part of the assets, rights and liabilities of the existing Regional Council to the new District Council, the substitution of the new District Council for the existing one in legal proceedings, the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the existing Council to the new one, the continuance of any laws made by the existing Council subject to adaptations and modifications, and any incidental, consequential and supplementary matters considered necessary.

Question: What does the transfer in whole or in part of the assets, rights and liabilities of the existing Regional Council to the new District Council, the substitution of the new District Council for the existing one in legal proceedings, the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the existing Council to the new one, the continuance of any laws made by the existing Council subject to adaptations and modifications, and any incidental, consequential and supplementary matters considered necessary pertain to?
Answer: These matters pertain to what the Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram can provide for.

Question: Who is referred to instead of the Governor and Government of the State in the application of provisions to the Union territory of Mizoram?
Answer: The Administrator of the Union territory

Question: Who applies the provisions to the Union territory of Mizoram instead of the Governor and Government of the State?
Answer: The Administrator of the Union territory

Question: What does the term 'State' refer to in the context of the Union territory of Mizoram?
Answer: The Union territory of Mizoram

Question: What is the term for Mizoram in the context of Indian political divisions?
Answer: The Union territory

Question: Who is responsible for the transfer or re-employment of employees from the existing Regional Council to the new District Council?
Answer: The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram

Question: What is the role of the Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram in relation to the Regional Council and the new District Council?
Answer: He is responsible for the transfer or re-employment of employees from the existing Regional Council to the new District Council.

Question: What can Parliament do according to Amendment of the Schedule in the Constitution of India?
Answer: Parliament may from time to time by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any reference to this Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such Schedule as so amended.

Question: What does it mean when any reference to the Schedule in the Constitution of India is construed as a reference to such Schedule as so amended?
Answer: It means that the Parliament has the power to amend the Schedule by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Schedule from time to time.

Question: Does the amendment of the Schedule count as an amendment of the Constitution?
Answer: No, such law as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.

Question: What is not deemed to be an amendment of the Constitution under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph for the purposes of article 368?
Answer: The amendment of the Schedule doesn't count as an amendment of the Constitution.

Question: What is included in the Defence of India part of the Union List?
Answer: Defence of India and every part thereof including preparation for defence and all such acts as may be conducive in times of war to its prosecution and after its termination to effective demobilisation.

Question: What does the preparation for defence and all such acts as may be conducive in times of war to its prosecution and after its termination to effective demobilisation pertain to within the Union List?
Answer: This pertains to the Defence of India part of the Union List.

Question: What does the Union List mention about the armed forces?
Answer: It includes the naval, military and air forces; any other armed forces of the Union. It also mentions the deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject to the control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State in aid of the civil power; powers, jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the members of such forces while on such deployment.

Question: What forces are included in the Union List, and what does it say about their deployment, powers, jurisdiction, privileges, and liabilities?
Answer: The Union List includes the naval, military and air forces; any other armed forces of the Union. It mentions the deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject to the control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State in aid of the civil power; powers, jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the members of such forces while on such deployment.

Question: What does the Union List say about cantonment areas?
Answer: It includes the delimitation of cantonment areas, local self-government in such areas, the constitution and powers within such areas of cantonment authorities and the regulation of house accommodation (including the control of rents) in such areas.

Question: What does the Union List include about the regulations and powers within cantonment areas?
Answer: The Union List includes the delimitation of cantonment areas, local self-government in such areas, the constitution and powers within such areas of cantonment authorities and the regulation of house accommodation (including the control of rents) in such areas.

Question: What is mentioned under the regulation of arms in the Union List?
Answer: It includes arms, firearms, ammunition and explosives.

Question: What categories are mentioned in the Union List under the regulation of arms?
Answer: The categories mentioned are arms, firearms, ammunition and explosives.

Question: What is mentioned about energy in the Union List?
Answer: It includes atomic energy.

Question: Which type of energy is included in the Union List?
Answer: Atomic energy is included in the Union List.

Question: What industries are declared by Parliament by law to be necessary?
Answer: Industries necessary for the purpose of defence or for the prosecution of war.

Question: What is the purpose of the industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary?
Answer: For the purpose of defence or for the prosecution of war

Question: What is the Central Bureau responsible for?
Answer: Intelligence and Investigation.

Question: Which bureau is responsible for Intelligence and Investigation?
Answer: The Central Bureau

Question: What are the reasons for preventive detention?
Answer: Reasons connected with Defence, Foreign Affairs, or the security of India.

Question: What are the reasons connected with defence, foreign affairs, or the security of India?
Answer: Preventive detention

Question: What matters bring the Union into relation with any foreign country?
Answer: Foreign affairs.

Question: What is the matter that brings the Union into relation with any foreign country?
Answer: Foreign affairs.

Question: What is the role of the United Nations Organisation according to the constitution?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: Is the role of the United Nations Organisation specified in the provided constitution text?
Answer: No, it is not specified.

Question: What is involved in the participation in international conferences, associations and other bodies?
Answer: Implementing of decisions made thereat.

Question: What is the action done as a result of participation in international conferences, associations, and other bodies?
Answer: Implementing of decisions made thereat.

Question: What does entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries include?
Answer: Implementing of treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign countries.

Question: What does implementing of treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign countries entail?
Answer: Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries.

Question: What does the constitution of India say about war and peace?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: Is the information about what the constitution of India says about war and peace specified in the provided text?
Answer: No, it is not specified.

Question: What is the scope of foreign jurisdiction according to the constitution?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: Is the scope of foreign jurisdiction according to the constitution specified in the provided text?
Answer: No, it is not specified.

Question: What does the constitution say about citizenship, naturalisation and aliens?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: Is it specified in the provided text what the constitution says about citizenship, naturalisation and aliens?
Answer: No, it's not specified.

Question: What is the process for extradition according to the constitution?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: What information is provided in the text regarding the process for extradition according to the constitution?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: What does the constitution say about admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: Is the information about what the constitution says regarding admission into, and emigration and expulsion from India specified in the provided text?
Answer: No

Question: What does the constitution say about pilgrimages to places outside India?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: Is the information about pilgrimages to places outside India specified in the provided text of the constitution?
Answer: No

Question: What crimes are classified as piracies and crimes committed on the high seas or in the air?
Answer: Offences against the law of nations committed on land or the high seas or in the air.

Question: What are offences against the law of nations committed on land or the high seas or in the air classified as?
Answer: These offences are classified as piracies and crimes committed on the high seas or in the air.

Question: What infrastructure is covered under railways?
Answer: Not specified in the provided text.

Question: What is the specific information provided about the infrastructure covered under railways?
Answer: The specific information is not specified in the provided text.

Question: What are national highways?
Answer: Highways declared by or under law made by Parliament to be national highways.

Question: What is the legal process for declaring a highway to be a national highway?
Answer: A highway is declared to be a national highway by or under law made by Parliament.

Question: What does shipping and navigation on inland waterways include?
Answer: Navigation on waterways declared by Parliament by law to be national waterways, as regards mechanically propelled vessels; the rule of the road on such waterways.

Question: What does the rule of the road on waterways declared by Parliament by law to be national waterways pertain to?
Answer: It pertains to the shipping and navigation on inland waterways, specifically regarding mechanically propelled vessels.

Question: What is included in maritime shipping and navigation?
Answer: Shipping and navigation on tidal waters; provision of education and training for the mercantile marine and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other agencies.

Question: What does shipping and navigation on tidal waters, provision of education and training for the mercantile marine, and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other agencies refer to?
Answer: This refers to what is included in maritime shipping and navigation.

Question: What are the provisions for the safety of shipping and aircraft?
Answer: Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provision for the safety of shipping and aircraft.

Question: What are some examples of provisions for the safety of shipping and aircraft?
Answer: Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons

Question: What are major ports according to the constitution?
Answer: Ports declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to be major ports, including their delimitation, and the constitution and powers.

Question: What does it mean for a port to be declared a major port by or under law made by Parliament or existing law, including their delimitation, and the constitution and powers?
Answer: It means that the port is recognized as a major port according to the constitution.

Question: What does the constitution of India mention about port quarantine?
Answer: Port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith; seamen's and marine hospitals.

Question: What does the constitution of India specify regarding seamen's and marine hospitals, including those associated with port quarantine?
Answer: The constitution of India mentions port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith; seamen's and marine hospitals.

Question: What is stated about airways in the constitution of India?
Answer: Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes; regulation and organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes; provision for aeronautical education and training and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other agencies.

Question: What does the constitution of India state about the regulation and organisation of air traffic, provision of aerodromes, aeronautical education and training provided by States and other agencies?
Answer: The constitution of India states these issues under Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes; regulation and organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes; provision for aeronautical education and training and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other agencies.

Question: What does the constitution of India say about carriage of passengers and goods?
Answer: Carriage of passengers and goods by railway, sea or air, or by national waterways in mechanically propelled vessels.

Question: What modes of transportation are mentioned in the Indian constitution for carriage of passengers and goods?
Answer: Railway, sea or air, or by national waterways in mechanically propelled vessels.

Question: What are the regulations about posts and telegraphs in the constitution of India?
Answer: Posts and telegraphs; telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like forms of communication.

Question: What are the forms of communication regulated in the constitution of India?
Answer: Posts and telegraphs; telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like forms of communication.

Question: What is mentioned about currency and legal tender in the Indian constitution?
Answer: Currency, coinage and legal tender; foreign exchange.

Question: What is mentioned in the Indian constitution about currency, coinage, legal tender and foreign exchange?
Answer: Currency, coinage and legal tender; foreign exchange are mentioned in the Indian constitution.

Question: What does the constitution of India say about foreign loans?
Answer: Foreign loans.

Question: What does the constitution of India mention regarding 'Foreign loans'?
Answer: The constitution of India says about foreign loans.

Question: What is stated about the Reserve Bank of India in the constitution?
Answer: Reserve Bank of India.

Question: Which bank is mentioned in the constitution of India?
Answer: Reserve Bank of India

Question: What does the constitution of India say about trade and commerce with foreign countries?
Answer: Trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and export across customs frontiers; definition of customs frontiers.

Question: What aspects of interaction with foreign countries are defined in the constitution of India?
Answer: Trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and export across customs frontiers; definition of customs frontiers.

Question: What is mentioned about banking in the Indian constitution?
Answer: Banking.

Question: What is mentioned in the Indian constitution related to 'Banking'?
Answer: Banking

Question: What are the regulations about patents and trademarks in the constitution of India?
Answer: Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and merchandise marks.

Question: What are some intellectual property rights mentioned in the constitution of India?
Answer: Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and merchandise marks.

Question: What does the constitution of India say about standards of weight and measure?
Answer: Establishment of standards of weight and measure.

Question: What is established according to the constitution of India regarding weights and measures?
Answer: Standards of weight and measure

Question: What is the responsibility of the Union in terms of industries as declared by the Parliament by law?
Answer: The Union is responsible for the control of industries if declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.

Question: Who is responsible for the control of industries if declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest?
Answer: The Union is responsible for the control of industries if declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.

Question: What does the Union regulate in terms of oilfields and mineral oil resources?
Answer: The Union regulates and develops oilfields and mineral oil resources, petroleum and petroleum products, and other liquids and substances declared by Parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable.

Question: What does the Union develop and regulate, including petroleum, petroleum products, and other liquids and substances declared by Parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable?
Answer: The Union regulates and develops oilfields and mineral oil resources.

Question: Who is responsible for the regulation of labour and safety in mines and oilfields?
Answer: The Union is responsible for the regulation of labour and safety in mines and oilfields.

Question: What is the Union responsible for in mines and oilfields?
Answer: The Union is responsible for the regulation of labour and safety in mines and oilfields.

Question: What does the Union regulate in terms of rivers and river valleys?
Answer: The Union regulates and develops inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to which such regulation and development is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.

Question: What is the extent of the Union's regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys?
Answer: The Union regulates and develops inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to which such regulation and development is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.

Question: What is the Union's role in the manufacture, supply, and distribution of salt?
Answer: The Union is responsible for the manufacture, supply, and distribution of salt by Union agencies, as well as the regulation and control of manufacture, supply, and distribution of salt by other agencies.

Question: Who is responsible for the manufacture, supply, and distribution of salt, and the regulation and control of manufacture, supply, and distribution of salt by other agencies?
Answer: The Union is responsible for these tasks.

Question: What institutions are known at the commencement of this Constitution to be of national importance?
Answer: The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria Memorial and the Indian War Memorial, and any other like institution financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance.

Question: Which institutions like the National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria Memorial and the Indian War Memorial were known at the commencement of the Constitution and are financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance?
Answer: At the commencement of the Constitution, the institutions known to be of national importance and financed wholly or in part by the Government of India include the National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria Memorial, the Indian War Memorial, and any other like institutions declared by Parliament by law.

Question: What universities were declared at the commencement of this Constitution to be institutions of national importance?
Answer: The universities known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the Delhi University, the University established in pursuance of article 371E, and any other institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance were declared to be institutions of national importance.

Question: Which institutions were known at the commencement of the Constitution as the Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University, the Delhi University, the University established in pursuance of article 371E, and any other institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance?
Answer: These universities were declared at the commencement of this Constitution to be institutions of national importance.

Question: What do Union agencies and institutions provide according to the Indian Constitution?
Answer: Professional, vocational or technical training, the promotion of special studies or research, scientific or technical assistance in the investigation or detection of crime.

Question: What type of services do the Union agencies and institutions provide according to the Indian Constitution, especially in the fields of education, research, and crime investigation?
Answer: Professional, vocational or technical training, the promotion of special studies or research, scientific or technical assistance in the investigation or detection of crime.

Question: What does point 66 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher education or research and scientific and technical institutions.

Question: Which point of the Constitution of India pertains to the co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher education or research and scientific and technical institutions?
Answer: Point 66

Question: What does point 67 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological sites and remains, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance.

Question: Which point of the Constitution of India pertains to ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological sites and remains, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance?
Answer: Point 67

Question: What does point 68 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and Anthropological Surveys of India; Meteorological organisations.

Question: Which point of the Constitution of India pertains to The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and Anthropological Surveys of India; Meteorological organisations?
Answer: Point 68

Question: What does point 69 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Census.

Question: Which point of the Constitution of India pertains to the Census?
Answer: Point 69

Question: What does point 70 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Union Public Service; All-India Services; Union Public Service Commission.

Question: Which point of the Constitution of India pertains to Union Public Service; All-India Services; Union Public Service Commission?
Answer: Point 70

Question: What does point 71 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Union pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the Government of India or out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Question: Which point of the Constitution of India pertains to Union pensions, pensions payable by the Government of India or out of the Consolidated Fund of India?
Answer: Point 71

Question: What does point 72 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices of President and Vice-President; the Election Commission.

Question: Which point of the Constitution of India pertains to Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices of President and Vice-President; the Election Commission?
Answer: Point 72

Question: What does point 73 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.

Question: Which part of the Constitution of India discusses the salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People?
Answer: Point 73

Question: What does point 74 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of the members and the Committees of each House; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before committees of Parliament or commissions appointed by Parliament.

Question: Which section of the Constitution of India pertains to the powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of the members and the Committees of each House; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before committees of Parliament or commissions appointed by Parliament?
Answer: Point 74

Question: What does point 75 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Emoluments, allowances, privileges, and rights in respect of leave of absence, of the President and Governors; salaries and allowances of the Ministers for the Union; the salaries, allowances, and rights in respect of leave of absence and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor General.

Question: Which section of the Constitution of India discusses the emoluments, allowances, privileges, and rights in respect of leave of absence, of the President and Governors; salaries and allowances of the Ministers for the Union; the salaries, allowances, and rights in respect of leave of absence and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor General?
Answer: Point 75 of the Constitution of India.

Question: What does point 76 of the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: Audit of the accounts.

Question: Which point of the Constitution of India pertains to the audit of the accounts?
Answer: Point 76

Question: What does the 77th item in the Constitution of India pertain to?
Answer: The 77th item pertains to the Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court, including contempt of such Court, and the fees taken therein; it also specifies the persons entitled to practise before the Supreme Court.

Question: Which item in the Constitution of India pertains to the Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court, including contempt of such Court, and the fees taken therein; and also specifies the persons entitled to practise before the Supreme Court?
Answer: The 77th item pertains to this.

Question: What does the 78th item in the Indian Constitution deal with?
Answer: The 78th item deals with the Constitution and organisation (including vacations) of the High Courts, excluding provisions as to officers and servants of High Courts; it also specifies the persons entitled to practise before the High Courts.

Question: Which item in the Indian Constitution specifies the Constitution and organisation (including vacations) of the High Courts, excluding provisions as to officers and servants of High Courts, and also specifies the persons entitled to practise before the High Courts?
Answer: The 78th item in the Indian Constitution deals with this.

Question: What is explained in the 79th item of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The 79th item explains the extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and exclusion of the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.

Question: Which item of the Indian Constitution explains the extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and exclusion of the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory?
Answer: The 79th item of the Indian Constitution explains this.

Question: What does the 80th item of the Indian Constitution discuss?
Answer: The 80th item discusses the extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any State to any area outside that State, but not so as to enable the police of one State to exercise powers and jurisdiction in any area outside that State without the consent of the Government of the State in which such area is situated; it also talks about the extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any State to railway areas outside that State.

Question: Which item of the Indian Constitution discusses the extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any State to any area outside that State, and the extension of these powers to railway areas outside that State?
Answer: The 80th item of the Indian Constitution discusses this.

Question: What does the 81st item of the Indian Constitution cover?
Answer: The 81st item covers Inter-State migration and inter-State quarantine.

Question: Which item of the Indian Constitution covers Inter-State migration and inter-State quarantine?
Answer: The 81st item of the Indian Constitution covers Inter-State migration and inter-State quarantine.

Question: What taxes does the 82nd item in the Indian Constitution discuss?
Answer: The 82nd item discusses taxes on income other than agricultural income.

Question: What does the Indian Constitution's 82nd item discuss on?
Answer: The 82nd item discusses taxes on income other than agricultural income.

Question: What does the 83rd item of the Indian Constitution pertain to?
Answer: The 83rd item pertains to duties of customs including export duties.

Question: Which item of the Indian Constitution pertains to duties of customs including export duties?
Answer: The 83rd item of the Indian Constitution pertains to duties of customs including export duties.

Question: What does the 84th item of the Indian Constitution list?
Answer: The 84th item lists duties of excise on goods manufactured or produced in India, namely petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (also known as petrol), natural gas, aviation turbine fuel, and tobacco and tobacco products.

Question: Which item of the Indian Constitution lists duties of excise on goods manufactured or produced in India, namely petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (also known as petrol), natural gas, aviation turbine fuel, and tobacco and tobacco products?
Answer: The 84th item of the Indian Constitution lists these duties.

Question: What tax does the 85th item in the Indian Constitution discuss?
Answer: The 85th item discusses Corporation tax.

Question: Which item in the Indian Constitution discusses the Corporation tax?
Answer: The 85th item discusses Corporation tax.

Question: What does the 86th item in the Indian Constitution specify?
Answer: The 86th item specifies taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land, of individuals and companies; it also mentions taxes on the capital of companies.

Question: What does the term 'taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land, of individuals and companies; it also mentions taxes on the capital of companies' refer to in the Indian Constitution?
Answer: It refers to the 86th item in the Indian Constitution.

Question: What does the 87th item in the Indian Constitution deal with?
Answer: The 87th item deals with Estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land.

Question: Which item in the Indian Constitution deals with Estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land?
Answer: The 87th item in the Indian Constitution deals with this.

Question: What does the 88th item in the Indian Constitution cover?
Answer: The 88th item covers Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land.

Question: Which item in the Indian Constitution covers duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land?
Answer: The 88th item in the Indian Constitution covers this.

Question: What taxes does the 89th item of the Indian Constitution specify?
Answer: The 89th item specifies Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by railway, sea or air, and taxes on railway fares and freights.

Question: Which item of the Indian Constitution specifies Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by railway, sea or air, and taxes on railway fares and freights?
Answer: The 89th item of the Indian Constitution specifies these taxes.

Question: What does the 90th item of the Indian Constitution pertain to?
Answer: The 90th item pertains to Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and futures markets.

Question: What does the Indian Constitution item that pertains to Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and futures markets correspond to?
Answer: It corresponds to the 90th item of the Indian Constitution

Question: What are the rates of stamp duty in respect of?
Answer: bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts

Question: What are bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts subject to in terms of charges?
Answer: They are subject to stamp duty rates.

Question: What are taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers for?
Answer: where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce

Question: In what scenario does the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers occur?
Answer: Such a sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce

Question: What do taxes on the consignments of goods pertain to?
Answer: where such consignment takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce

Question: Under what circumstances do taxes on the consignments of goods apply?
Answer: Taxes apply when such consignment takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce

Question: What are offences against laws with respect to?
Answer: any of the matters in this List

Question: What are 'any of the matters in this List' in relation to offences against laws?
Answer: They are what the offences against laws are with respect to.

Question: What are inquires, surveys and statistics used for?
Answer: for the purpose of any of the matters in this List

Question: What is the purpose of any of the matters in this List?
Answer: Inquires, surveys and statistics are used for this purpose.

Question: What does jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, pertain to?
Answer: any of the matters in this List; admiralty jurisdiction

Question: To what does the jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, pertain when considering any of the matters in this List and admiralty jurisdiction?
Answer: Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, pertain to any of the matters in this List and admiralty jurisdiction.

Question: What are the fees in respect of?
Answer: any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any court

Question: What is excluded from the matters listed in the fees?
Answer: Fees taken in any court

Question: What does any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III include?
Answer: any tax not mentioned in either of those Lists

Question: What does 'any tax not mentioned in either of those Lists' refer to?
Answer: It refers to any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III

Question: What does public order not include?
Answer: the use of any naval, military or air force or any other armed force of the Union or of any other force subject to the control of the Union or of any contingent or unit thereof in aid of the civil power

Question: What is not included in the definition of public order?
Answer: the use of any naval, military or air force or any other armed force of the Union or of any other force subject to the control of the Union or of any contingent or unit thereof in aid of the civil power

Question: What does police (including railway and village police) subject to?
Answer: the provisions of entry 2A of List I

Question: Which entity is subject to the provisions of entry 2A of List I?
Answer: Police, including railway and village police

Question: What do officers and servants of the High Court; procedure in rent and revenue courts; fees pertain to?
Answer: taken in all courts except the Supreme Court

Question: Where are the procedures of officers and servants of the High Court, rent and revenue courts, and fees not applicable?
Answer: Supreme Court

Question: What are prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature, and persons detained therein for?
Answer: arrangements with other States for the use of prisons and other institutions

Question: What are the arrangements with other States for the use of prisons and other institutions used for?
Answer: Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature, and persons detained therein

Question: What does local government entail?
Answer: the constitution and powers of municipal corporations, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement authorities and other local authorities for the purpose

Question: What are the constitution and powers of municipal corporations, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement authorities and other local authorities for the purpose of?
Answer: Local government

Question: What is meant by local self-government or village administration?
Answer: Local self-government or village administration refers to the governance and administration carried out at a local, often village, level. This usually involves local decision-making and management of local resources and services.

Question: What does the governance and administration carried out at a local, often village, level involve?
Answer: The governance and administration carried out at a local, often village, level, also known as local self-government or village administration, usually involves local decision-making and management of local resources and services.

Question: What does public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries entail?
Answer: This refers to services related to maintaining public health, ensuring sanitation, and the operation of healthcare facilities like hospitals and dispensaries.

Question: What does the operation of healthcare facilities and services related to maintaining public health and sanitation refer to?
Answer: This refers to public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries.

Question: What are pilgrimages other than pilgrimages to places outside India?
Answer: These are religious journeys or quests undertaken within India, excluding those to destinations outside the country.

Question: What are religious journeys or quests undertaken within India, excluding those to destinations outside the country?
Answer: These are pilgrimages other than pilgrimages to places outside India.

Question: What is meant by intoxicating liquors in this context?
Answer: Intoxicating liquors refers to alcoholic beverages. This includes their production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale.

Question: What does the term 'intoxicating liquors' encompass in terms of production and consumption?
Answer: The term 'intoxicating liquors' encompasses alcoholic beverages, including their production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale.

Question: What does relief of the disabled and unemployable refer to?
Answer: Relief of the disabled and unemployable refers to support and assistance provided to individuals who are disabled or unable to work.

Question: Who are the recipients of support and assistance in the context of relief programs?
Answer: The recipients of support and assistance in the context of relief programs are individuals who are disabled or unable to work.

Question: What does burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds refer to?
Answer: This refers to the provision and maintenance of spaces for the disposal of the deceased, either through burial or cremation.

Question: What is the purpose of providing and maintaining spaces for the disposal of the deceased?
Answer: The purpose is to facilitate burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds.

Question: What are libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the State?
Answer: These are institutions such as libraries and museums that are under the control or receive funding from the state government.

Question: What does it mean when institutions like libraries and museums are under the control or receive funding from the state government?
Answer: It means these libraries, museums and similar institutions are controlled or financed by the State.

Question: What does communications refer to?
Answer: Communications refers to the infrastructure and services for transportation and communication, such as roads, bridges, ferries, tramways, ropeways, inland waterways and non-mechanically propelled vehicles.

Question: What does the infrastructure and services for transportation and communication, such as roads, bridges, ferries, tramways, ropeways, inland waterways and non-mechanically propelled vehicles refer to?
Answer: This refers to Communications.

Question: What is meant by agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests and prevention of plant diseases?
Answer: This refers to farming and related activities, including education and research in this field, as well as measures to protect crops from pests and prevent plant diseases.

Question: What does farming and related activities refer to, including measures to protect crops from pests and prevent plant diseases, and also education and research in this field?
Answer: This refers to agriculture, which encompasses agricultural education and research, protection against pests, and prevention of plant diseases.

Question: What is meant by preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases; veterinary training and practice?
Answer: This refers to measures to preserve, protect and improve livestock, prevent animal diseases, and provide veterinary training and practice.

Question: What does it refer to when measures are taken to preserve, protect, and improve livestock, prevent animal diseases, and provide veterinary training and practice?
Answer: It refers to the preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases; veterinary training and practice.

Question: What does water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I mean?
Answer: This refers to the management of water resources, including water supply, irrigation, canals, drainage, embankments, and water storage. It also includes the generation of power from water, subject to the provisions specified in entry 56 of List I.

Question: What does the management of water resources, including water supply, irrigation, canals, drainage, embankments, and water storage, as well as the generation of power from water, subject to the provisions specified in entry 56 of List I refer to?
Answer: This refers to water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I.

Question: What does land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization refer to?
Answer: This refers to the administration of land, including land rights, land tenures, landlord-tenant relations, collection of rents, transfer and alienation of agricultural land, land improvement, agricultural loans, and colonization.

Question: What does the administration of land, including land rights, land tenures, landlord-tenant relations, collection of rents, transfer and alienation of agricultural land, land improvement, agricultural loans, and colonization imply?
Answer: It implies land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization.

Question: What are fisheries?
Answer: Fisheries refers to the industry or occupation of catching, processing and selling fish.

Question: What does the industry or occupation of catching, processing and selling fish refer to?
Answer: It refers to fisheries.

Question: What does courts of wards subject to the provisions of entry 34 of List I; encumbered and attached estates mean?
Answer: Courts of wards refers to a court that has jurisdiction over the property of individuals who are unable to manage their own affairs. Encumbered and attached estates refer to property that is under a charge or a liability. These are subject to the provisions in entry 34 of List I.

Question: What is the jurisdiction of courts of wards and what does encumbered and attached estates refer to?
Answer: Courts of wards refers to a court that has jurisdiction over the property of individuals who are unable to manage their own affairs. Encumbered and attached estates refer to property that is under a charge or a liability.

Question: What does regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the provisions of List I with respect to regulation and development under the control of the Union mean?
Answer: This refers to the control and regulation of mining activities and the development of mineral resources, as per the regulations specified in List I and under the control of the Union.

Question: What does the control and regulation of mining activities and the development of mineral resources, as per the regulations specified in List I and under the control of the Union refer to?
Answer: This refers to the regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the provisions of List I with respect to regulation and development under the control of the Union.

Question: What does entry 24 pertain to?
Answer: Industries subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I.

Question: Which entry pertains to industries subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I?
Answer: Entry 24

Question: What does entry 25 cover?
Answer: Gas and gas-works.

Question: What is covered under entry 25?
Answer: Gas and gas-works.

Question: What is the scope of entry 26?
Answer: Trade and commerce within the State subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List III.

Question: What is subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List III?
Answer: Trade and commerce within the State, as per scope of entry 26.

Question: What is entry 27 about?
Answer: Production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List III.

Question: What is subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List III?
Answer: Entry 27, which is about the production, supply and distribution of goods

Question: What is covered under entry 28?
Answer: Markets and fairs.

Question: Which entry covers Markets and fairs?
Answer: Entry 28

Question: What does entry 30 refer to?
Answer: Money-lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness.

Question: What does 'Money-lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness' refer to?
Answer: Entry 30

Question: What is entry 31 about?
Answer: Inns and inn-keepers.

Question: What is the topic discussed in the entry about Inns and inn-keepers?
Answer: Entry 31

Question: What does entry 32 cover?
Answer: Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than those specified in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary, scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co-operative societies.

Question: Which entry covers incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than those specified in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary, scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co-operative societies?
Answer: Entry 32

Question: What does entry 33 pertain to?
Answer: Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60 of List I; sports, entertainments and amusements.

Question: Which entry pertains to theatres and dramatic performances, cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60 of List I, and sports, entertainments and amusements?
Answer: Entry 33

Question: What does entry 34 cover?
Answer: Betting and gambling.

Question: Which entry covers betting and gambling?
Answer: Entry 34

Question: What is the scope of entry 35?
Answer: Works, lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of the State.

Question: What is vested in or in the possession of the State according to entry 35?
Answer: Works, lands and buildings

Question: What is entry 37 about?
Answer: Elections to the Legislature of the State subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament.

Question: Which entry talks about Elections to the Legislature of the State subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament?
Answer: Entry 37

Question: What does entry 38 cover?
Answer: Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, if there is a Legislative Council, of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof.

Question: What does the 'Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, if there is a Legislative Council, of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof' refer to?
Answer: It refers to entry 38.

Question: What is the scope of entry 39?
Answer: Powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of the members and the committees thereof, and, if there is a Legislative Council, of that Council and of the members and the committees thereof; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before committees of the Legislature of the State.

Question: Which entry refers to the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of the members and the committees thereof, and, if there is a Legislative Council, of that Council and of the members and the committees thereof; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before committees of the Legislature of the State?
Answer: Entry 39

Question: What does entry 40 refer to?
Answer: Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the State.

Question: What does 'Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the State' refer to in a document or list?
Answer: It refers to entry 40.

Question: What is entry 41 about?
Answer: State public services; State Public Service Commission.

Question: Which entry is about State public services and the State Public Service Commission?
Answer: Entry 41

Question: What does entry 42 cover?
Answer: State pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the State or out of the Consolidated Fund of the State.

Question: What is covered under state pensions, specifically those payable by the State or out of the Consolidated Fund of the State?
Answer: Entry 42 covers this.

Question: What is the scope of entry 43?
Answer: Public debt of the State.

Question: What does entry 43 pertain to?
Answer: Public debt of the State.

Question: What does entry 44 refer to?
Answer: Treasure trove.

Question: What is referred to as a treasure trove in the list?
Answer: Entry 44

Question: What is entry 45 about?
Answer: Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the maintenance of land records, survey.

Question: Which entry is about land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the maintenance of land records, survey?
Answer: Entry 45

Question: What taxes are levied on agricultural income?
Answer: Taxes on agricultural income.

Question: What is levied on agricultural income?
Answer: Taxes

Question: What duties are in respect to succession to agricultural land?
Answer: Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land.

Question: What are the responsibilities related to duties in respect of succession to agricultural land?
Answer: These duties refer to the obligations that come with inheriting agricultural land, such as maintaining the land, paying relevant taxes, and adhering to any regulations related to agricultural practices.

Question: What levy is imposed on agricultural land?
Answer: Estate duty in respect of agricultural land.

Question: What is the specific duty imposed on agricultural land?
Answer: Estate duty is imposed on agricultural land.

Question: What taxes are imposed on lands and buildings?
Answer: Taxes on lands and buildings.

Question: What is imposed on lands and buildings?
Answer: Taxes

Question: What are the taxes on mineral rights?
Answer: Taxes on mineral rights subject to any limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating to mineral development.

Question: What are the limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating to mineral development?
Answer: These are the taxes on mineral rights.

Question: What are the duties of excise on goods manufactured or produced in the state?
Answer: Duties of excise on alcoholic liquors for human consumption, opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.

Question: On what goods are the duties of excise applied in the state, specifically in terms of alcoholic beverages, opium, Indian hemp, and other narcotic drugs and narcotics?
Answer: The duties of excise are applied on goods manufactured or produced in the state, specifically on alcoholic liquors for human consumption, opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.

Question: What are the taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity?
Answer: Taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity.

Question: What is the term for the financial charges imposed on the use or trade of power?
Answer: Taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity.

Question: What are the taxes on the sale of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit, natural gas, aviation turbine fuel and alcoholic liquor for human consumption?
Answer: Taxes on the sale of these items, but not including sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce or sale in the course of international trade or commerce of such goods.

Question: What are the conditions under which no taxes are levied on the sale of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit, natural gas, aviation turbine fuel and alcoholic liquor for human consumption?
Answer: No taxes are levied on the sale of these items in the course of inter-State trade or commerce or sale in the course of international trade or commerce.

Question: What are the taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways?
Answer: Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways.

Question: What do you call the charges applied on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways?
Answer: Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways.

Question: What are the taxes on vehicles suitable for use on roads?
Answer: Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads, including tramcars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List II.

Question: What types of vehicles are the taxes applicable to, as mentioned in entry 35 of List II?
Answer: The taxes are applicable to vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads, including tramcars.

Question: What are the taxes on animals and boats?
Answer: Taxes on animals and boats.

Question: What is the term used to describe levies on animals and boats?
Answer: Taxes on animals and boats.

Question: What are capitation taxes?
Answer: Capitation taxes.

Question: What type of taxes are Capitation?
Answer: Capitation taxes.

Question: What are the taxes on entertainments and amusements?
Answer: Taxes on entertainments and amusements to the extent levied and collected by a Panchayat or a Municipality or a Regional Council or a District Council.

Question: Who levies and collects taxes on entertainments and amusements?
Answer: A Panchayat or a Municipality or a Regional Council or a District Council levies and collects taxes on entertainments and amusements.

Question: What are the rates of stamp duty in respect of documents?
Answer: Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified in the provisions of List I with regard to rates of stamp duty.

Question: What documents have rates of stamp duty other than those specified in the provisions of List I?
Answer: Documents other than those specified in the provisions of List I have rates of stamp duty.

Question: What are offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List?
Answer: Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.

Question: What is the term for violations related to the items listed here?
Answer: Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.

Question: What are the jurisdiction and powers of all courts?
Answer: Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court.

Question: What does 'except the Supreme Court' refer to in the context of jurisdiction and powers?
Answer: It refers to all courts.

Question: What does List III in the text refer to?
Answer: List III refers to the Concurrent List that includes matters like criminal law, criminal procedure, preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, transfer of property other than agricultural land, contracts, bankruptcy and insolvency, trust and trustees, administration of justice, and civil procedure.

Question: What matters are included in the Concurrent List referred to as List III?
Answer: The Concurrent List or List III includes matters like criminal law, criminal procedure, preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, transfer of property other than agricultural land, contracts, bankruptcy and insolvency, trust and trustees, administration of justice, and civil procedure.

Question: What does point 1 of List III cover?
Answer: Point 1 of List III covers criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at the commencement of this Constitution but excluding offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in List I or List II and excluding the use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the civil power.

Question: What does criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at the commencement of this Constitution, but excluding offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in List I or List II and excluding the use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the civil power, cover in List III?
Answer: It covers point 1 of List III.

Question: What is included in point 2 of List III?
Answer: Point 2 of List III includes criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Criminal Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What does point 2 of List III include at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Point 2 of List III includes criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Question: What does point 3 of List III pertain to?
Answer: Point 3 of List III pertains to preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, the maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community; persons subjected to such detention.

Question: Which point of List III is related to preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, the maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community; persons subjected to such detention?
Answer: Point 3 of List III is related to this.

Question: What does point 4 of List III specify?
Answer: Point 4 of List III specifies the removal from one State to another State of prisoners, accused persons and persons subjected to preventive detention for reasons specified in entry 3 of this List.

Question: What does the removal from one State to another State of prisoners, accused persons and persons subjected to preventive detention for reasons specified in entry 3 of this List specify?
Answer: This specifies point 4 of List III.

Question: What does point 5 of List III contain?
Answer: Point 5 of List III contains matters related to marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and succession; joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution subject to their personal law.

Question: Which list and point contains matters related to marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and succession; joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution subject to their personal law?
Answer: Point 5 of List III contains these matters.

Question: What is covered under point 6 of List III?
Answer: Point 6 of List III covers the transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds and documents.

Question: Which point of List III is about the transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds and documents?
Answer: It is point 6 of List III.

Question: What is included in point 7 of List III?
Answer: Point 7 of List III includes contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carriage, and other special forms of contracts, but not including contracts relating to agricultural land.

Question: Which list and point includes contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carriage, and other special forms of contracts, but not including contracts relating to agricultural land?
Answer: This is included in point 7 of List III.

Question: What does point 8 of List III refer to?
Answer: Point 8 of List III refers to actionable wrongs.

Question: Which point of List III refers to actionable wrongs?
Answer: Point 8 of List III refers to actionable wrongs.

Question: What is mentioned in point 9 of List III?
Answer: Point 9 of List III mentions bankruptcy and insolvency.

Question: What does point 9 of List III mention?
Answer: Bankruptcy and insolvency

Question: What does point 10 of List III cover?
Answer: Point 10 of List III covers trust and trustees.

Question: What is covered under trust and trustees?
Answer: Trust and trustees are covered under point 10 of List III.

Question: What is specified in point 11 of List III?
Answer: Point 11 of List III specifies administrators-general and official trustees.

Question: What does List III specify about administrators-general and official trustees?
Answer: Administrators-general and official trustees are specified in point 11 of List III.

Question: What does point 11A of List III pertain to?
Answer: Point 11A of List III pertains to the administration of justice; constitution and organisation of all courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Courts.

Question: Which list point pertains to the administration of justice; constitution and organisation of all courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Courts?
Answer: Point 11A of List III pertains to the administration of justice; constitution and organisation of all courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Courts.

Question: What is covered under point 12 of List III?
Answer: Point 12 of List III covers evidence and oaths; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and judicial proceedings.

Question: Which list and point covers evidence and oaths; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and judicial proceedings?
Answer: Evidence and oaths; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and judicial proceedings are covered under point 12 of List III.

Question: What is included in point 13 of List III?
Answer: Point 13 of List III includes civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What does Point 13 of List III specifically include?
Answer: Point 13 of List III includes civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution.

Question: What does the 14th point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution relate to?
Answer: Contempt of court, but not including contempt of the Supreme Court.

Question: Which point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution relates to contempt of court, but not including contempt of the Supreme Court?
Answer: The 14th point

Question: What does the 15th point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution refer to?
Answer: Vagrancy; nomadic and migratory tribes.

Question: What does the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of the Constitution refer to when it mentions vagrancy, nomadic and migratory tribes?
Answer: The 15th point

Question: What does the 17th point address in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Prevention of cruelty to animals.

Question: Which point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution addresses the prevention of cruelty to animals?
Answer: The 17th point.

Question: What is the focus of the 20th point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Economic and social planning.

Question: What is the focus of Economic and social planning in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: It is the focus of the 20th point.

Question: What is addressed in the 22nd point of the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Trade unions; industrial and labour disputes.

Question: In which point of the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of the Constitution are trade unions, industrial and labour disputes addressed?
Answer: 22nd point

Question: What does the 24th point of the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution concern?
Answer: Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, employers' liability, workmen's compensation, invalidity and old age pensions and maternity benefits.

Question: Which point of the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution concerns welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, employers' liability, workmen's compensation, invalidity and old age pensions and maternity benefits?
Answer: The 24th point

Question: What is the 28th point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution about?
Answer: Charities and charitable institutions, charitable and religious endowments and religious institutions.

Question: Which point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution is about charities and charitable institutions, charitable and religious endowments and religious institutions?
Answer: The 28th point

Question: What is covered in the 30th point of the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.

Question: Which point of the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution covers the registration of births and deaths in vital statistics?
Answer: The 30th point.

Question: What is the 32nd point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution?
Answer: Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically propelled vessels, and the rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage.

Question: What does the 32nd point in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution refer to?
Answer: Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically propelled vessels, and the rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage.

Question: What does the Constitution of India specify about trade and commerce in?
Answer: The Constitution of India specifies trade and commerce in the products of any industry where the control of such industry by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, imported goods of the same kind as such products, foodstuffs including edible oilseeds and oils, cattle fodder including oilcakes and other concentrates, raw cotton whether ginned or unginned and cotton seed, and raw jute.

Question: What products, goods, and materials does the Constitution of India specify for trade and commerce where the control of such industry by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest?
Answer: The Constitution of India specifies trade and commerce in the products of any industry, imported goods of the same kind as such products, foodstuffs including edible oilseeds and oils, cattle fodder including oilcakes and other concentrates, raw cotton whether ginned or unginned and cotton seed, and raw jute.

Question: What does the Constitution of India mention about weights and measures?
Answer: The Constitution of India mentions weights and measures except the establishment of standards.

Question: What does the Constitution of India exclude in the context of weights and measures?
Answer: The Constitution of India excludes the establishment of standards in the context of weights and measures.

Question: What items does the constitution list under the jurisdiction of the state with respect to taxes?
Answer: The constitution lists mechanically propelled vehicles including the principles on which taxes on such vehicles are to be levied, factories, boilers, and electricity under the jurisdiction of the state with respect to taxes.

Question: Under whose jurisdiction does the constitution list taxes on mechanically propelled vehicles, factories, boilers, and electricity?
Answer: The constitution lists these items under the jurisdiction of the state with respect to taxes.

Question: What does the Constitution of India state about archaeological sites and remains?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance fall under its provisions.

Question: Which archaeological sites and remains does the Constitution of India state fall under its provisions?
Answer: The Constitution of India states that archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance fall under its provisions.

Question: Which languages are mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India?
Answer: The languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India are Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, and Maithili.

Question: In which schedule of the Constitution of India are the languages Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, and Maithili mentioned?
Answer: The languages Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, and Maithili are mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India.

Question: What is enumerated in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution lists various land reform and tenure abolition acts, including The Bihar Land Reforms Act, The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, The Bombay Maleki Tenure Abolition Act, The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act, The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, etc.

Question: Which acts, related to land reform and tenure abolition, are listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution lists The Bihar Land Reforms Act, The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, The Bombay Maleki Tenure Abolition Act, The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act, The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, and others.

Question: What is the The Bihar Land Reforms Act?
Answer: The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 is an act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution. It's a regional law specific to the state of Bihar.

Question: What is an act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution and is a regional law specific to the state of Bihar?
Answer: The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950

Question: What is the The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act?
Answer: The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 is an act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution. It's a regional law specific to what was then the state of Bombay.

Question: Which act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution is a regional law specific to what was then the state of Bombay?
Answer: The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948

Question: What is the purpose of the acts listed in the Ninth Schedule?
Answer: The acts listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution are mainly for land reform and the abolition of various tenure systems.

Question: What are the main purposes of the acts listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution?
Answer: The acts listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution are mainly for land reform and the abolition of various tenure systems.

Question: What is the The United Provinces Land Acquisition Act?
Answer: The United Provinces Land Acquisition Act, 1948 is an act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution. It's a regional law specific to what were then the United Provinces.

Question: Where is The United Provinces Land Acquisition Act, 1948 listed and what region does it specifically apply to?
Answer: The United Provinces Land Acquisition Act, 1948 is listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution and is specifically applicable to the region that was then known as the United Provinces.

Question: What is the The Railway Companies Act?
Answer: The Railway Companies Act, 1951 is an act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution. It's a law related to emergency provisions for railway companies.

Question: In which schedule of the Indian Constitution is The Railway Companies Act, 1951 listed and what is it related to?
Answer: The Railway Companies Act, 1951 is listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution and it is related to emergency provisions for railway companies.

Question: What is the The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act, 1950 is an act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution. It's a regional law specific to the state of Madhya Pradesh.

Question: Which state-specific law is listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution and was passed in 1950?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act

Question: What is the The Hyderabad Jagirs Act?
Answer: The Hyderabad Jagirs Act, 1358F is an act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution. It's a regional law specific to what was then the state of Hyderabad.

Question: Where is the Hyderabad Jagirs Act, 1358F listed and where was it specifically applicable?
Answer: The Hyderabad Jagirs Act, 1358F is listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution and was specifically applicable to the then state of Hyderabad.

Question: What is the The Madras Estates Act?
Answer: The Madras Estates Act, 1948 is an act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution. It's a regional law specific to what was then the state of Madras.

Question: Which act listed in the Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution is a regional law specific to the former state of Madras?
Answer: The Madras Estates Act, 1948

Question: What is the name of the amendment act mentioned in section 13?
Answer: The Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 1953

Question: Which section mentions The Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 1953?
Answer: Section 13

Question: Which act was amended by West Bengal Act XXIX of 1951?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Development and Planning Act, 1948

Question: Which act amended The West Bengal Land Development and Planning Act, 1948?
Answer: West Bengal Act XXIX of 1951

Question: What is the Andhra Pradesh Act X of 1961?
Answer: The Andhra Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1961

Question: Which Act is known as the Andhra Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1961?
Answer: Andhra Pradesh Act X of 1961

Question: What is Andhra Pradesh Act XXI of 1961?
Answer: The Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Validation) Act, 1961

Question: Which Act is referred to as The Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Validation) Act, 1961?
Answer: Andhra Pradesh Act XXI of 1961

Question: What is the Assam Act IX of 1961?
Answer: The Assam State Acquisition of Lands belonging to Religious or Charitable Institution of Public Nature Act, 1959

Question: Which act is known as The Assam State Acquisition of Lands belonging to Religious or Charitable Institution of Public Nature Act, 1959?
Answer: The Assam Act IX of 1961

Question: What is Bihar Act XX of 1954?
Answer: The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1953

Question: Which act is known as The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1953?
Answer: Bihar Act XX of 1954

Question: What is the Bihar Act XII of 1962?
Answer: The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961

Question: Which act is also known as The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961?
Answer: The Bihar Act XII of 1962

Question: What is the Gujarat Act XXVI of 1961?
Answer: The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling Act, 1960

Question: Which act is also known as the Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling Act, 1960?
Answer: The Gujarat Act XXVI of 1961

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act XXVII of 1961?
Answer: The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961

Question: Which Act is referred to as The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961?
Answer: The Maharashtra Act XXVII of 1961

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act XLV of 1961?
Answer: The Maharashtra Act XLV of 1961 is the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region and Kutch Area) Amendment and Further Amendment Act, 1961.

Question: What is the legal name for the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region and Kutch Area) Amendment and Further Amendment Act?
Answer: The legal name for the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region and Kutch Area) Amendment and Further Amendment Act is the Maharashtra Act XLV of 1961.

Question: What is the Hyderabad Act XXI of 1950?
Answer: The Hyderabad Act XXI of 1950 is The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950.

Question: What is the official name of The Hyderabad Act XXI of 1950?
Answer: The official name of The Hyderabad Act XXI of 1950 is The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950.

Question: What is the Kerala Act III of 1961?
Answer: The Kerala Act III of 1961 is The Jenmikaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1960.

Question: Which act is also known as The Jenmikaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1960?
Answer: The Kerala Act III of 1961 is also known as The Jenmikaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1960.

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act XX of 1959?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Act XX of 1959 is The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959.

Question: What is the official name of The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code?
Answer: The official name of The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code is the Madhya Pradesh Act XX of 1959.

Question: What is the Mysore Act XIII of 1952?
Answer: The Mysore Act XIII of 1952 is The Mysore Tenancy Act, 1952.

Question: What is the official name for The Mysore Tenancy Act?
Answer: The official name for The Mysore Tenancy Act is the Mysore Act XIII of 1952.

Question: What is the Rajasthan Act III of 1955?
Answer: The Rajasthan Act III of 1955 is The Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955.

Question: What is the formal name of The Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955?
Answer: The formal name of The Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 is Rajasthan Act III of 1955.

Question: What is the Uttar Pradesh Act XVII of 1960?
Answer: The Uttar Pradesh Act XVII of 1960 is The Kumaun and Uttarakhand Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1960.

Question: Which act is referred to as The Kumaun and Uttarakhand Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1960?
Answer: The Kumaun and Uttarakhand Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1960 is referred to as the Uttar Pradesh Act XVII of 1960.

Question: What is the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act?
Answer: The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act is a law passed in 1953 (West Bengal Act I of 1954).

Question: When was the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act passed and what is its official designation?
Answer: The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act was passed in 1953 and its official designation is West Bengal Act I of 1954.

Question: What is the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1969?
Answer: The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 35 of 1969) is a law passed in Kerala to amend land reforms.

Question: What is the purpose of the Kerala Act 35 of 1969?
Answer: The purpose of the Kerala Act 35 of 1969, also known as the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, is to amend land reforms in Kerala.

Question: What is the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954?
Answer: The Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (Delhi Act VIII of 1954) is a law passed in Delhi regarding land reforms.

Question: Which law was passed in Delhi regarding land reforms?
Answer: The Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (Delhi Act VIII of 1954) was passed in Delhi regarding land reforms.

Question: What is the Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings Act?
Answer: The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings Act is a law passed in 1972 (Haryana Act 26 of 1972) to regulate land holdings in Haryana.

Question: In which year was the Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, a law to regulate land holdings in Haryana, passed and what is its act number?
Answer: The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings Act was passed in 1972 and it is known as Haryana Act 26 of 1972.

Question: What is the Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act?
Answer: The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act is a law passed in 1972 (Gujarat Act 2 of 1974) to amend the rules on agricultural land ceilings in Gujarat.

Question: When was the Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act passed and what does it pertain to?
Answer: The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act was passed in 1972 (Gujarat Act 2 of 1974) and it pertains to the amendment of the rules on agricultural land ceilings in Gujarat.

Question: What is the West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 is a piece of legislation designated as West Bengal Act XII of 1972.

Question: What is the official designation of the West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972?
Answer: The official designation of the West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 is West Bengal Act XII of 1972.

Question: What is the designation of The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1972?
Answer: The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1972 is designated as Gujarat Act 5 of 1973.

Question: What is Gujarat Act 5 of 1973?
Answer: Gujarat Act 5 of 1973 is The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1972.

Question: What is the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974?
Answer: The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974 is a piece of legislation designated as Orissa Act 9 of 1974.

Question: What is the designation of the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974?
Answer: The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974 is designated as Orissa Act 9 of 1974.

Question: What is the Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act,1974?
Answer: The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act,1974 is a piece of legislation designated as Tripura Act 7 of 1974.

Question: What is the designation of The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act,1974?
Answer: The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act,1974 is designated as Tripura Act 7 of 1974.

Question: What is the designation of The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957?
Answer: The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 is designated as Central Act 67 of 1957.

Question: What is Central Act 67 of 1957 commonly known as?
Answer: Central Act 67 of 1957 is commonly known as The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957.

Question: What is The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act?
Answer: The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 is a piece of legislation designated as Central Act 57 of 1972.

Question: What is the designation of The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972?
Answer: The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 is designated as Central Act 57 of 1972.

Question: What is the Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1972?
Answer: The Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1972 is a piece of legislation designated as Central Act 58 of 1972.

Question: What is the designation of The Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1972?
Answer: The Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1972 is designated as Central Act 58 of 1972.

Question: What is the designation of The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973?
Answer: The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 is designated as Central Act 46 of 1973.

Question: Which act is designated as Central Act 46 of 1973?
Answer: The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 is designated as Central Act 46 of 1973.

Question: What is The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974?
Answer: The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 is a piece of legislation designated as Central Act 28 of 1974.

Question: What is the designation of The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974?
Answer: The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 is designated as Central Act 28 of 1974.

Question: What is the designation of The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974?
Answer: The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974 is designated as Central Act 37 of 1974.

Question: What act is designated as Central Act 37 of 1974?
Answer: Central Act 37 of 1974 is designated as The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974.

Question: What is the Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act?
Answer: The Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act is a central act, numbered 52 of 1974.

Question: What is the central act, numbered 52 of 1974, known as?
Answer: The central act, numbered 52 of 1974, is known as The Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act.

Question: What is the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act?
Answer: The Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act is a central act, numbered 57 of 1974.

Question: What is the number and year of the central act known as the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act?
Answer: The Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act is numbered 57 of 1974.

Question: What is the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1964?
Answer: The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1964 is a Maharashtra Act, numbered XVI of 1965.

Question: What is the specific number of the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1964?
Answer: The specific number of the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1964 is XVI of 1965.

Question: What is the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965?
Answer: The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965 is an Orissa Act, numbered 13 of 1965.

Question: Which Orissa Act is numbered 13 of 1965?
Answer: The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965 is the Orissa Act numbered 13 of 1965.

Question: What is the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1972?
Answer: The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1972 is a Uttar Pradesh Act, numbered 18 of 1973.

Question: What is the Uttar Pradesh Act, numbered 18 of 1973?
Answer: The Uttar Pradesh Act, numbered 18 of 1973 is the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1972.

Question: What is the Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act, 1975?
Answer: The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act, 1975 is a Tripura Act, numbered 3 of 1975.

Question: What is the number of the Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act, 1975?
Answer: The number of the Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act, 1975 is 3 of 1975.

Question: What is the name of the regulation from 1971 related to Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms?
Answer: The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms Regulation, 1971

Question: What year was The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms Regulation enacted?
Answer: 1971

Question: What is the amendment to the Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms in 1973?
Answer: The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms (Amendment) Regulation, 1973

Question: What is the official name of the 1973 amendment to the Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms?
Answer: The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms (Amendment) Regulation, 1973

Question: What is Section 66A and Chapter IVA related to?
Answer: Motor Vehicles Act, 1939

Question: Which act are Section 66A and Chapter IVA a part of?
Answer: Motor Vehicles Act, 1939

Question: What is the Central Act 10 of 1955?
Answer: The Essential Commodities Act, 1955

Question: Which Central Act is referred to as The Essential Commodities Act, 1955?
Answer: Central Act 10 of 1955

Question: What act is the Central Act 13 of 1976?
Answer: The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976

Question: What is the formal name of the central act that is referred to as the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976?
Answer: Central Act 13 of 1976

Question: What is the Central Act 19 of 1976?
Answer: The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976

Question: What is the name of the Central Act, also known as The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act?
Answer: Central Act 19 of 1976

Question: What act is the Central Act 31 of 1976?
Answer: The Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976

Question: What is the Central Act number for The Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976?
Answer: Central Act 31 of 1976

Question: What is the Central Act 33 of 1976?
Answer: The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976

Question: Which Central Act is The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act associated with?
Answer: Central Act 33 of 1976

Question: What is the Assam Act 1 of 1957?
Answer: The Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1956

Question: Which act is known as the Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1956?
Answer: The Assam Act 1 of 1957

Question: What is the Gujarat Act 14 of 1973?
Answer: The Gujarat Private Forests (Acquisition) Act, 1972

Question: Which Act is referred to as The Gujarat Private Forests (Acquisition) Act, 1972?
Answer: The Gujarat Act 14 of 1973

Question: What is the Haryana Act 17 of 1976?
Answer: The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976

Question: Which Act is The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976 also known as?
Answer: Haryana Act 17 of 1976

Question: What is the Himachal Pradesh Act 8 of 1974?
Answer: The Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land Reforms Act, 1972

Question: Which act is also known as The Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land Reforms Act, 1972?
Answer: The Himachal Pradesh Act 8 of 1974

Question: What is the Karnataka Act 31 of 1974?
Answer: The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1974

Question: Which act is also known as The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1974?
Answer: The Karnataka Act 31 of 1974

Question: What is the Karnataka Act 27 of 1976?
Answer: The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976

Question: Which Act is known as The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976?
Answer: The Karnataka Act 27 of 1976

Question: What is the Kerala Act 12 of 1966?
Answer: The Kerala Prevention of Eviction Act, 1966

Question: What is the official name of the Kerala Act 12 passed in 1966?
Answer: The Kerala Prevention of Eviction Act, 1966

Question: What is the Kerala Act 20 of 1969?
Answer: The Sreepadam Lands Enfranchisement Act

Question: Which act is known as The Sreepadam Lands Enfranchisement Act?
Answer: Kerala Act 20 of 1969

Question: What is the Kerala Act 20 of 1971?
Answer: The Sree Pandaravaka Lands (Vesting and Enfranchisement) Act

Question: Which Act is referred to as The Sree Pandaravaka Lands (Vesting and Enfranchisement) Act?
Answer: Kerala Act 20 of 1971

Question: What is the Kerala Act 26 of 1971?
Answer: The Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act

Question: Which act is referred to as The Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act?
Answer: The Kerala Act 26 of 1971

Question: What is the Kerala Act 18 of 1974?
Answer: The Kerala Agricultural Workers Act

Question: Which act is known as The Kerala Agricultural Workers Act?
Answer: Kerala Act 18 of 1974

Question: What is the Kerala Act 29 of 1974?
Answer: The Kerala Cashew Factories (Acquisition) Act

Question: Which Act is referred to as The Kerala Cashew Factories (Acquisition) Act?
Answer: Kerala Act 29 of 1974

Question: What is the Kerala Act 23 of 1975?
Answer: The Kerala Chitties Act

Question: Which act is known as The Kerala Chitties Act?
Answer: Kerala Act 23 of 1975

Question: What is the Kerala Act 31 of 1975?
Answer: The Kerala Scheduled Tribes (Restriction on Transfer of Lands and Restoration of Alienated Lands) Act

Question: Which Act is referred to as 'The Kerala Scheduled Tribes (Restriction on Transfer of Lands and Restoration of Alienated Lands) Act'?
Answer: The Kerala Act 31 of 1975

Question: What is the Kerala Act 15 of 1976?
Answer: The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act

Question: Which act is referred to as The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act?
Answer: Kerala Act 15 of 1976

Question: What is the Kerala Act 16 of 1976?
Answer: The Kanam Tenancy Abolition Act

Question: Which act is known as The Kanam Tenancy Abolition Act?
Answer: The Kerala Act 16 of 1976

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act 20 of 1974?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act

Question: Which act is referred to as the Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Act 20 of 1974

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 1976?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act

Question: What is the official name of the act also known as the Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 1976?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act XIV of 1975?
Answer: The Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act

Question: Which Act is referred to as The Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act?
Answer: Maharashtra Act XIV of 1975

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act XXI of 1975?
Answer: The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on Holdings) and (Amendment) Act

Question: Which act is referred to as the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on Holdings) and (Amendment) Act?
Answer: Maharashtra Act XXI of 1975

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act XXIX of 1975?
Answer: The Maharashtra Private Forest (Acquisition) Act

Question: Which Act is also known as The Maharashtra Private Forest (Acquisition) Act?
Answer: Maharashtra Act XXIX of 1975

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act XLVII of 1975?
Answer: The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on Holdings) and (Amendment) Amendment Act

Question: Which Act is also known as The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on Holdings) and (Amendment) Amendment Act?
Answer: Maharashtra Act XLVII of 1975

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act II of 1976?
Answer: The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act

Question: Which Act is referred to as the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act?
Answer: The Maharashtra Act II of 1976

Question: What is the Orissa Act I of 1952?
Answer: The Orissa Estates Abolition Act

Question: What is the formal name for 'The Orissa Estates Abolition Act'?
Answer: Orissa Act I of 1952

Question: What is the Rajasthan Act XXVII of 1954?
Answer: The Rajasthan Colonisation Act

Question: Which act is referred to as The Rajasthan Colonisation Act?
Answer: Rajasthan Act XXVII of 1954

Question: What is the Rajasthan Act 11 of 1964?
Answer: The Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Landowners’ Estates Act

Question: Which Rajasthan Act is known as The Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Landowners’ Estates Act?
Answer: Rajasthan Act 11 of 1964

Question: When was the Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act enacted?
Answer: 1976

Question: Which Act was enacted in Rajasthan in the year 1976 related to the imposition of ceiling on agricultural holdings?
Answer: Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act

Question: What is the Rajasthan Act 12 of 1976?
Answer: The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1976

Question: Which act is referred to as the Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1976?
Answer: The Rajasthan Act 12 of 1976

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Reduction of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1970

Question: Which act is referred to as The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Reduction of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1970?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1972?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1972

Question: Which act is referred to as The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1972?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1972

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Sixth Amendment Act, 1972

Question: Which act is also known as The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Sixth Amendment Act, 1972?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1974?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1974

Question: What is the official name of the Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1974?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1974

Question: What is Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951?
Answer: The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950

Question: What Act is also known as The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950?
Answer: Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951

Question: What is the Uttar Pradesh Act 34 of 1974?
Answer: The Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1974

Question: Which Act is also known as The Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1974?
Answer: Uttar Pradesh Act 34 of 1974

Question: What is the Uttar Pradesh Act 20 of 1976?
Answer: The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976

Question: Which act is referred to as The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976?
Answer: The Uttar Pradesh Act 20 of 1976

Question: What is the West Bengal Act XXVIII of 1972?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1972

Question: Which Act is known as the West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1972?
Answer: The West Bengal Act XXVIII of 1972

Question: What is the Bihar Act 13 of 1975?
Answer: The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) (Amendment) Amending Act, 1974

Question: Which act is also known as The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) (Amendment) Amending Act, 1974?
Answer: Bihar Act 13 of 1975

Question: What is the Haryana Act 14 of 1977?
Answer: The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1977

Question: Which act is referred to as The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1977?
Answer: Haryana Act 14 of 1977

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1978

Question: Which act is referred to as the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1978?
Answer: It is referred to as the Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978.

Question: What is the Uttar Pradesh Act 15 of 1978?
Answer: The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978

Question: Which act is referred to as The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978?
Answer: Uttar Pradesh Act 15 of 1978

Question: What is the West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act, 1978?
Answer: It is an act passed in West Bengal, known as West Bengal Act XXIV of 1978.

Question: What is the West Bengal Act XXIV of 1978 commonly known as?
Answer: It is commonly known as the West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act, 1978.

Question: What is the West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act, 1980?
Answer: It is an act passed in West Bengal, known as West Bengal Act LVI of 1980.

Question: What is the West Bengal Act LVI of 1980 known as?
Answer: It is known as the West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act, 1980.

Question: What is the Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964?
Answer: It is an act passed in Goa, Daman and Diu, known as Goa, Daman and Diu Act 7 of 1964.

Question: What is the Goa, Daman and Diu Act 7 of 1964 also known as?
Answer: It is also known as the Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964.

Question: What is the Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1976?
Answer: It is an act passed in Goa, Daman and Diu, known as Goa, Daman and Diu Act 17 of 1976.

Question: What is the Goa, Daman and Diu Act 17 of 1976 also known as?
Answer: It is also known as the Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1976.

Question: What is the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer Regulation, 1959?
Answer: It is a regulation passed in Andhra Pradesh, known as Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1959.

Question: What is the Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1959 also known as?
Answer: It is also known as the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer Regulation, 1959.

Question: What is the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Laws (Extension and Amendment) Regulation, 1963?
Answer: It is a regulation passed in Andhra Pradesh, known as Andhra Pradesh Regulation 2 of 1963.

Question: What is another name for the regulation passed in Andhra Pradesh, known as Andhra Pradesh Regulation 2 of 1963?
Answer: It is also known as the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Laws (Extension and Amendment) Regulation, 1963.

Question: What is the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885?
Answer: It is an act passed in Bihar, known as Bihar Act 8 of 1885.

Question: What is Bihar Act 8 of 1885 also known as?
Answer: Bihar Act 8 of 1885 is also known as the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885.

Question: What is the Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908?
Answer: It is an act passed in Bengal, known as Bengal Act 6 of 1908.

Question: What is the Bengal Act 6 of 1908 also known as?
Answer: It is also known as the Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908.

Question: What is the Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition Act, 1969?
Answer: It is an act passed in Gujarat, known as Gujarat Act 16 of 1969.

Question: What is the Gujarat Act 16 of 1969 also known as?
Answer: It is also known as the Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition Act, 1969.

Question: What is the Gujarat Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976?
Answer: It is an act passed in Gujarat, known as Gujarat Act 37 of 1976.

Question: What is Gujarat Act 37 of 1976 also known as?
Answer: It is also known as the Gujarat Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976.

Question: What is the Gujarat Act 30 of 1977?
Answer: Laws (Amendment) Act, 1977

Question: What is another name for the Laws (Amendment) Act, 1977?
Answer: Gujarat Act 30 of 1977

Question: What is the Gujarat Act 37 of 1980?
Answer: The Bombay Land Revenue (Gujarat Second Amendment) Act, 1980

Question: Which act is referred to as The Bombay Land Revenue (Gujarat Second Amendment) Act, 1980?
Answer: The Gujarat Act 37 of 1980

Question: What is the Gujarat Act 8 of 1982?
Answer: The Bombay Land Revenue Code and Land Tenure Abolition Laws (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1982

Question: What is the formal name for Gujarat Act 8 of 1982?
Answer: The Bombay Land Revenue Code and Land Tenure Abolition Laws (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1982

Question: What is the Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 1969?
Answer: The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) Act, 1968

Question: What is the official name for Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 1969?
Answer: The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) Act, 1968

Question: What is the Himachal Pradesh Act 16 of 1986?
Answer: The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1986

Question: Which act is known as The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1986?
Answer: It is known as the Himachal Pradesh Act 16 of 1986

Question: What is the Karnataka Act 2 of 1979?
Answer: The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) Act, 1978

Question: Which act is referred to as The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) Act, 1978?
Answer: The Karnataka Act 2 of 1979

Question: What is the Kerala Act 13 of 1978?
Answer: The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1978

Question: Which act is known as the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1978?
Answer: The Kerala Act 13 of 1978

Question: What is the Kerala Act 19 of 1981?
Answer: The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981

Question: Which Kerala Act is also known as The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981?
Answer: Kerala Act 19 of 1981

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act 61 of 1976?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Third Amendment) Act, 1976

Question: What is the official name for the Madhya Pradesh Act 61 of 1976?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Third Amendment) Act, 1976

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 1980?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Amendment) Act, 1980

Question: Which act is referred to as The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Amendment) Act, 1980?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 1980

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act 11 of 1981?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Akrishik Jot Uchchatam Seema Adhiniyam, 1981

Question: What is the official name of the Madhya Pradesh Akrishik Jot Uchchatam Seema Adhiniyam?
Answer: Madhya Pradesh Act 11 of 1981

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1984?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Second Amendment) Act, 1976

Question: Which act is also known as The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Second Amendment) Act, 1976?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1984

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act 14 of 1984?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1984

Question: Which act is referred to as The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1984?
Answer: It is referred to as the Madhya Pradesh Act 14 of 1984

Question: What is the Madhya Pradesh Act 8 of 1989?
Answer: The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1989

Question: What is the official name for the Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act?
Answer: It is known as the Madhya Pradesh Act 8 of 1989.

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act 41 of 1966?
Answer: The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966

Question: Which act is also known as the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966?
Answer: Maharashtra Act 41 of 1966

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act 30 of 1977?
Answer: The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code and the Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes (Second Amendment) Act, 1976

Question: Which act is also known as The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code and the Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes (Second Amendment) Act, 1976?
Answer: The Maharashtra Act 30 of 1977

Question: What is the Maharashtra Act 16 of 1985?
Answer: The Maharashtra Abolition of Subsisting Proprietary Rights to Mines and Minerals in certain Lands Act, 1985

Question: Which Act is known as 'The Maharashtra Abolition of Subsisting Proprietary Rights to Mines and Minerals in certain Lands Act, 1985'?
Answer: Maharashtra Act 16 of 1985

Question: What is the Orissa Regulation 2 of 1956?
Answer: The Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of Immovable Property (by Scheduled Tribes) Regulation, 1956

Question: Which regulation is referred to as The Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of Immovable Property (by Scheduled Tribes) Regulation, 1956?
Answer: Orissa Regulation 2 of 1956

Question: When was the Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act enacted?
Answer: 1975

Question: Which legislation was enacted in Orissa in 1975?
Answer: Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act

Question: What is the Orissa Act 29 of 1976?
Answer: The Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1975

Question: What is the official name of the Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act?
Answer: Orissa Act 29 of 1976

Question: When was the Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act enacted?
Answer: 1984

Question: What act was enacted in Rajasthan in 1984?
Answer: Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act

Question: What is the Rajasthan Act 13 of 1984?
Answer: The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1984

Question: What is the official name of the Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act?
Answer: It is officially known as the Rajasthan Act 13 of 1984.

Question: When was the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act enacted?
Answer: 1979

Question: What was enacted in Tamil Nadu related to land reforms in the year 1979?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1980?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1980

Question: Which Act is referred to as The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1980?
Answer: It is referred to as Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1980

Question: When was the Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act enacted?
Answer: 1982

Question: Which act was enacted in Uttar Pradesh in the year 1982?
Answer: Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act

Question: What is the West Bengal Act 18 of 1965?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965

Question: What is the official name for the West Bengal Act 18 of 1965?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965

Question: When was the West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act enacted?
Answer: 1969

Question: What act was enacted in West Bengal in the year 1969?
Answer: West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act

Question: What is the West Bengal Act 36 of 1977?
Answer: The West Bengal Estate Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1977

Question: Which act is referred to as The West Bengal Estate Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1977?
Answer: The West Bengal Act 36 of 1977

Question: When was the West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act enacted?
Answer: 1979

Question: What act was enacted in West Bengal in 1979?
Answer: West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act

Question: What is the West Bengal Act 33 of 1981?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1981

Question: What is the official name for the West Bengal Act 33 of 1981?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1981

Question: When was the Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act enacted?
Answer: 1981

Question: What act was enacted in Calcutta in 1981?
Answer: The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act

Question: What is the West Bengal Act 23 of 1982?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1982

Question: What is the official title of the West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act passed in 1982?
Answer: West Bengal Act 23 of 1982

Question: When was the Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) (Amendment) Act enacted?
Answer: 1984

Question: What act was enacted in 1984 related to thikka tenancy in Calcutta?
Answer: Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) (Amendment) Act

Question: What is the West Bengal Act 41 of 1984?
Answer: The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1984

Question: Which act is referred to as The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1984?
Answer: West Bengal Act 41 of 1984

Question: What is the Mahe Land Reforms Act?
Answer: It is an act from 1968, referenced as Pondicherry Act 1 of 1968.

Question: Which act is referred to as Pondicherry Act 1 of 1968?
Answer: The Mahe Land Reforms Act is referred to as Pondicherry Act 1 of 1968.

Question: When was the Mahe Land Reforms Act amended?
Answer: It was amended in 1980, referenced as Pondicherry Act 1 of 1981.

Question: What is the reference name of the Mahe Land Reforms Act amendment that took place in 1980?
Answer: The amendment is referenced as Pondicherry Act 1 of 1981.

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Act?
Answer: It is an act from 1993, referenced as Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 1994, that reserves seats in educational institutions and appointments or posts in the Services under the State.

Question: Which act, referenced as Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 1994, reserves seats in educational institutions and appointments or posts in the Services under the State?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Act

Question: What is the Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy Act?
Answer: It is an act from 1947, referenced as Bihar Act 4 of 1948.

Question: What is the year and reference of the Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy Act?
Answer: The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy Act is from 1947 and is referenced as Bihar Act 4 of 1948.

Question: What is the Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act?
Answer: It is an act from 1956, referenced as Bihar Act 22 of 1956.

Question: Which act is referenced as Bihar Act 22 of 1956?
Answer: The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act is referenced as Bihar Act 22 of 1956.

Question: When was the Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act last amended?
Answer: It was last amended in 1981, referenced as Bihar Act 35 of 1982.

Question: What does Bihar Act 35 of 1982 refer to?
Answer: Bihar Act 35 of 1982 refers to the last amendment of the Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act in 1981.

Question: What is the Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Act?
Answer: It is an act from 1984, referenced as Karnataka Act 3 of 1984, that prohibits transfer of certain lands.

Question: Which act from 1984, referenced as Karnataka Act 3 of 1984, prohibits transfer of certain lands?
Answer: The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Act.

Question: What is the Rajasthan Colonisation Act?
Answer: It is an act that was amended in 1987 and 1989, referenced as Rajasthan Act 2 of 1987 and Rajasthan Act 12 of 1989 respectively.

Question: Which act was amended in 1987 and 1989, referenced as Rajasthan Act 2 of 1987 and Rajasthan Act 12 of 1989 respectively?
Answer: The Rajasthan Colonisation Act was amended in 1987 and 1989, referenced as Rajasthan Act 2 of 1987 and Rajasthan Act 12 of 1989 respectively.

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act of 1983?
Answer: Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984

Question: What is the formal name for the Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act of 1983

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act of 1986?
Answer: Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1986

Question: What is Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1986 also known as?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act of 1986

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act of 1987?
Answer: Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988

Question: What is Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988 also known as?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act of 1987

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment (Amendment) Act of 1989?
Answer: Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1989

Question: What is the Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1989 also known as?
Answer: The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment (Amendment) Act of 1989

Question: What is the West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1981?
Answer: West Bengal Act 50 of 1981

Question: What is another name for the West Bengal Act 50 of 1981?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1981

Question: What is the West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1986?
Answer: West Bengal Act 5 of 1986

Question: What is West Bengal Act 5 of 1986 also known as?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1986

Question: What is the West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act of 1986?
Answer: West Bengal Act 19 of 1986

Question: What is another name for the West Bengal Act 19 of 1986?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act of 1986

Question: What is the West Bengal Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act of 1986?
Answer: West Bengal Act 35 of 1986

Question: What is the official name of West Bengal Act 35 of 1986?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act of 1986

Question: What is the West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1989?
Answer: West Bengal Act 23 of 1989

Question: What is the West Bengal Act 23 of 1989 known as?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1989

Question: What is the West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1990?
Answer: West Bengal Act 24 of 1990

Question: What is West Bengal Act 24 of 1990 also known as?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act of 1990

Question: What is the West Bengal Land Reforms Tribunal Act of 1991?
Answer: West Bengal Act 12 of 1991

Question: What is the 'West Bengal Act 12 of 1991' known as?
Answer: The West Bengal Land Reforms Tribunal Act of 1991

Question: What does 'House' mean in the Tenth Schedule?
Answer: Either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State

Question: What could 'Either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State' refer to in the Tenth Schedule?
Answer: House

Question: In the Tenth Schedule, what does 'legislature party' refer to?
Answer: The group consisting of all the members of that House for the time being belonging to that political party in accordance with the said provisions

Question: What is the group consisting of all the members of that House for the time being belonging to that political party in accordance with the said provisions referred to in the Tenth Schedule?
Answer: It refers to the 'legislature party'

Question: What does 'original political party' mean in the Tenth Schedule?
Answer: In relation to a member of a House, it means the political party to which the member originally belongs

Question: Who does the 'original political party' refer to in the context of a member of a House according to the Tenth Schedule?
Answer: It refers to the political party to which the member originally belongs

Question: What does 'paragraph' refer to in this text?
Answer: A paragraph of this Schedule.

Question: In the context of this text, what does 'A paragraph of this Schedule' refer to?
Answer: It refers to a 'paragraph'.

Question: Under what conditions can a member of a House be disqualified based on defection?
Answer: A member can be disqualified if he voluntarily gives up his membership of the political party or if he votes or abstains from voting contrary to the direction issued by the political party without obtaining prior permission and such action has not been condoned within fifteen days.

Question: What does it mean if a member voluntarily gives up his membership, votes, or abstains from voting contrary to the direction issued by the political party without obtaining prior permission, and such action has not been condoned within fifteen days?
Answer: It means the member can be disqualified based on defection.

Question: How is an elected member of a House deemed to belong to a political party?
Answer: An elected member is deemed to belong to the political party that set him up as a candidate for election.

Question: How does a political party determine which elected member belongs to them?
Answer: The political party determines that an elected member belongs to them if they set him up as a candidate for election.

Question: What happens if an elected member of a House joins a political party after being elected independently?
Answer: The member will be disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins any political party after such election.

Question: What is the consequence for an independent elected member of a House who joins a political party after the election?
Answer: The member will be disqualified for being a member of the House.

Question: When can a nominated member of a House be disqualified for being a member of the House?
Answer: A nominated member of a House can be disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat.

Question: What happens if a nominated member of a House joins a political party after six months from the date he takes his seat?
Answer: If a nominated member of a House joins any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat, he can be disqualified for being a member of the House.

Question: What happens to a person who is a member of a House at the commencement of the Constitution (Fiftysecond Amendment) Act, 1985?
Answer: A person who, on the commencement of the Constitution (Fiftysecond Amendment) Act, 1985, is a member of a House (whether elected or nominated as such) shall, if he was a member of political party immediately before such commencement, be deemed to have been elected as a member of such House as a candidate set up by such political party. In any other case, he is deemed to be an elected member of the House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party or, as the case may be, be deemed to be a nominated member of the House.

Question: What does the Constitution (Fiftysecond Amendment) Act, 1985 state about a person who is already a member of a House at the commencement of the Act, particularly in regards to their political affiliation?
Answer: According to the Constitution (Fiftysecond Amendment) Act, 1985, if a person is a member of a House at the commencement of the Act and was a member of a political party immediately before such commencement, they are deemed to have been elected as a member of the House as a candidate set up by that political party. If they were not affiliated with any political party, they are deemed to be an elected member of the House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party or, as the case may be, deemed to be a nominated member of the House.

Question: When does disqualification on ground of defection not apply according to paragraph 4?
Answer: A member of a House shall not be disqualified under subparagraph (1) of paragraph 2 where his original political party merges with another political party and he claims that he and any other members of his original political party have become members of such other political party or, as the case may be, of a new political party formed by such merger; or have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate group.

Question: What is the scenario in which a member of a House is not disqualified under subparagraph (1) of paragraph 2 when his original political party merges with another political party?
Answer: Disqualification on ground of defection does not apply when his original political party merges with another political party and he claims that he and any other members of his original political party have become members of such other political party or, as the case may be, of a new political party formed by such merger; or have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate group, according to paragraph 4.

Question: What is considered as the political party of a member whose original party has merged with another party?
Answer: From the time of such merger, such other political party or new political party or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.

Question: What happens to the political party of a member when their original party merges with another party?
Answer: From the time of such merger, such other political party or new political party or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.

Question: When is the merger of the original political party of a member of a House deemed to have taken place?
Answer: The merger of the original political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if, no.

Question: Is it true that the merger of the original political party of a member of a House is deemed to have taken place under any circumstance?
Answer: No, the merger is only deemed to have taken place if certain conditions are met.

Question: What is the exception to disqualification under this Schedule?
Answer: A person who has been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall not be disqualified under this Schedule, if he voluntarily gives up the membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such election and does not, so long as he continues to hold such office thereafter, rejoin that political party or become a member of another political party; or if he, having given up by reason of his election to such office his membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such election, rejoins such political party after he ceases to hold such office.

Question: Who is not disqualified under this Schedule even if they voluntarily give up the membership of the political party they belonged to immediately before their election or if they rejoin that political party after they cease to hold office?
Answer: A person who has been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State is not disqualified under this Schedule.

Question: Who decides on questions as to disqualification on grounds of defection?
Answer: The question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final.

Question: To whom is the question of disqualification on grounds of defection referred for a final decision?
Answer: The question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House.

Question: What happens if a question arises whether the Chairman or the Speaker of a House has become subject to disqualification?
Answer: The question shall be referred for the decision of such member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final.

Question: To whom is the question referred for a decision if a question arises about the Chairman or the Speaker of a House being subject to disqualification, and whose decision is deemed final?
Answer: The question shall be referred for the decision of such member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final.

Question: How are the proceedings in relation to any question as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule deemed?
Answer: All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any question as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule shall be deemed to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature.

Question: What are all proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any question as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule deemed as?
Answer: They are deemed to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature.

Question: What is the jurisdiction of courts in regards to the disqualification of a member of a House?
Answer: According to the Constitution, no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the disqualification of a member of a House.

Question: What does the Constitution state about the jurisdiction of courts concerning the disqualification of a House member?
Answer: According to the Constitution, no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the disqualification of a member of a House.

Question: What was declared invalid due to lack of ratification in accordance with clause (2) of article 368?
Answer: Paragraph 7 was declared invalid for want of ratification in accordance with the proviso to clause (2) of article 368.

Question: What was Paragraph 7 declared invalid due to?
Answer: Lack of ratification in accordance with clause (2) of article 368

Question: Who can make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Schedule?
Answer: The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Schedule.

Question: Who may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of a Schedule in a House?
Answer: The Chairman or the Speaker of a House.

Question: What can these rules provide for?
Answer: These rules can provide for the maintenance of registers or records of the political parties, the report which the leader of a legislature party shall furnish, the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to admission to such political party of any members of the House, and the procedure for deciding any question referred to in subparagraph (1) of paragraph 6.

Question: What does the maintenance of registers or records of political parties, the report furnished by the leader of a legislature party, reports regarding admission to such political party of any members of the House, and the procedure for deciding any question referred to in subparagraph (1) of paragraph 6 refer to?
Answer: These refer to what these rules can provide for.

Question: When should the rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House be laid before the House?
Answer: The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House should be laid as soon as may be after they are made before the House for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.

Question: What is the time period within which the rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House need to be presented before the House?
Answer: The rules should be laid as soon as may be after they are made, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.

Question: What happens to the rules after the expiry of thirty days?
Answer: Upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days, unless they are sooner approved with or without modifications or disapproved by the House, they shall take effect on such approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be. If they are disapproved, they shall be of no effect.

Question: What occurs if the rules are not approved, with or without modifications, or disapproved by the House within a thirty day period?
Answer: Upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days, unless they are sooner approved with or without modifications or disapproved by the House, they shall take effect on such approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be. If they are disapproved, they shall be of no effect.

Question: What can the Chairman or the Speaker of a House do according to the constitution?
Answer: The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to the provisions of article 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other power which he may have under this Constitution direct that any wilful contravention by any person of the rules made under this paragraph may be dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.

Question: What does the Constitution say the Chairman or the Speaker of a House can do in the event of a wilful contravention by any person of the rules?
Answer: The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to the provisions of article 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other power which he may have under this Constitution direct that the contravention may be dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.

Question: What is included in the Eleventh Schedule?
Answer: The Eleventh Schedule includes topics such as Agriculture, Land improvement, Minor irrigation, Animal husbandry, Fisheries, Social forestry, Minor forest produce, Small scale industries, Rural housing, Drinking water, Roads, Rural electrification, Poverty alleviation programme, Education, Technical training, Libraries, Cultural activities, Health and sanitation, Family welfare, Women and child development, Social welfare, and Welfare of the weaker sections.

Question: What are some of the topics included in the Eleventh Schedule such as Agriculture, Land improvement, Minor irrigation, and Animal husbandry?
Answer: The Eleventh Schedule includes topics such as Agriculture, Land improvement, Minor irrigation, Animal husbandry, Fisheries, Social forestry, Minor forest produce, Small scale industries, Rural housing, Drinking water, Roads, Rural electrification, Poverty alleviation programme, Education, Technical training, Libraries, Cultural activities, Health and sanitation, Family welfare, Women and child development, Social welfare, and Welfare of the weaker sections.

Question: What kind of industries are included in the Eleventh Schedule?
Answer: Small scale industries, including food processing industries and Khadi, village and cottage industries are included in the Eleventh Schedule.

Question: Which schedule includes small scale industries, food processing industries, and Khadi, village, and cottage industries?
Answer: The Eleventh Schedule includes these industries.

Question: What welfare programs are included in the Eleventh Schedule?
Answer: Family welfare, Women and child development, Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded, and Welfare of the weaker sections, particularly of the Scheduled Castes are included in the Eleventh Schedule.

Question: Which Schedule includes programs such as family welfare, women and child development, social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded, and welfare of the weaker sections, particularly of the Scheduled Castes?
Answer: These programs are included in the Eleventh Schedule.

Question: What does the twelfth schedule of Article 243W include?
Answer: Urban planning including town planning, regulation of land-use and construction of buildings, planning for economic and social development, roads and bridges, water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes, public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management, fire services, urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects, safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded, slum improvement and upgradation, urban poverty alleviation, provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds, promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects, burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and electric crematoriums, cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals, vital statistics including registration of births and deaths, public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences, regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.

Question: Which article and schedule includes the regulation of land-use, construction of buildings, planning for economic and social development, roads and bridges, water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes, public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management, fire services, urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects, safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded, slum improvement and upgradation, urban poverty alleviation, provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds, promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects, burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and electric crematoriums, cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals, vital statistics including registration of births and deaths, public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences, regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries?
Answer: The twelfth schedule of Article 243W includes these provisions.

