THE COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISION AND
COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISION OF HIGH COURTS
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 2018
NO. 28 OF 2018
[20th August, 2018.]
An Act to amend the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2)  Save as otherwise provided, it shall be deemed to have come into force on the
3rd day of May, 2018.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—18
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ 41]
ubZ fnYyh] eaxyokj] vxLr 21] 2018@Jko.k 30] 1940 ¼'kd½
No. 41]
 NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, AUGUST 21, 2018/SHRAVANA 30, 1940 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—18
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 21st August, 2018/Shravana 30, 1940  (Saka)
The following Act of  Parliament received the assent of the President on the
20th August, 2018, and is hereby published for general information:—
2
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II—
2. In the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
Division of High Courts Act, 2015 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the
long title, after the words "Commercial Courts", the words "Commercial Appellate
Courts," shall be inserted.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) This Act may be called the Commercial Courts Act, 2015.".
4. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(I) clause (a) shall be renumbered as clause (aa) thereof, and before clause
(aa) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(a) "Commercial Appellate Courts" means the Commercial Appellate
Courts designated under section 3A;';
(II) in clause (i), for the words "which shall not be less than one crore
rupees", the words "which shall not be less than three lakh rupees" shall be
substituted.
5. In the principal Act, in Chapter II, for the Chapter heading, the following
Chapter heading shall be substituted, namely:—
"COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL APPELLATE COURTS,
COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISIONS".
6. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following provisos shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided that with respect to the High Courts having ordinary
original civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, after consultation
with the concerned High Court, by notification, constitute Commercial
Courts at the District Judge level:
Provided further that with respect to a territory over which the High
Courts have ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State Government may,
by notification, specify such pecuniary value which shall not be less than
three lakh rupees and not more than the pecuniary jurisdiction exercisable
by the District Courts, as it may consider necessary.";
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State
Government may, after consultation with the concerned High Court, by
notification, specify such pecuniary value which shall not be less than
three lakh rupees or such higher value, for whole or part of the State, as it
may consider necessary.";
(c) in sub-section (3),—
(i) for the words "State Government shall", the words "State
Government may" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words "Commercial Court, from amongst the cadre of Higher
Judicial Service in the State", the following words shall be substituted,
namely:—
"Commercial Court either at the level of District Judge or a
court below the level of a District Judge".
Amendment
of long title.
4 of 2016.
Amendment
of section 1.
Amendment
of section 2.
Substitution
of Chapter
heading.
Amendment
of section 3.
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
3
7. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"3A. Except the territories over which the High Courts have ordinary original
civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, after consultation with the concerned
High Court, by notification, designate such number of Commercial Appellate
Courts at District Judge level, as it may deem necessary, for the purposes of
exercising the jurisdiction and powers conferred on those Courts under this
Act.".
8. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "ordinary
civil jurisdiction", the words "ordinary original civil jurisdiction" shall be substituted.
9. Section 9 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
10. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (c), after the words "Specified Value;", the word "and" shall be
inserted;
(ii) in clause (d), the word "and", occurring at the end, shall be omitted;
(iii) clause (e) shall be omitted.
11. After Chapter III of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
"CHAPTER IIIA
PRE-INSTITUTION MEDIATION AND SETTLEMENT
12A. (1) A suit, which does not contemplate any urgent interim relief under
this Act, shall not be instituted unless the plaintiff exhausts the remedy of
pre-institution mediation in accordance with such manner and procedure as may
be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, authorise the Authorities
constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, for the purposes of
pre-institution mediation.
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Legal Services Authorities
Act, 1987, the Authority authorised by the Central Government under
sub-section (2) shall complete the process of mediation within a period of three
months from the date of application made by the plaintiff under sub-section (1):
Provided that the period of mediation may be extended for a further period
of two months with the consent of the parties:
Provided further that, the period during which the parties remained occupied
with the pre-institution mediation, such period shall not be computed for the
purpose of limitation under the Limitation Act, 1963.
(4) If the parties to the commercial dispute arrive at a settlement, the same
shall be reduced into writing and shall be signed by the parties to the dispute
and the mediator.
(5) The settlement arrived at under this section shall have the same status
and effect as if it is an arbitral award on agreed terms under sub-section (4) of
section 30 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.".
12. In section 13 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
Insertion of
new section
3A.
Designation
of
Commercial
Appellate
Courts.
Amendment
of section 4.
Omission of
section 9.
Amendment
of section 12.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIIA.
Pre-
Institution
Mediation
and
Settlement.
Amendment
of section 13.
39 of 1987.
39 of 1987.
36 of 1963.
26 of 1996.
4
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II—
"(1) Any person aggrieved by the judgment or order of a Commercial Court
below the level of a District Judge may appeal to the Commercial Appellate Court
within a period of sixty days from the date of judgment or order.
(1A) Any person aggrieved by the judgment or order of a Commercial Court
at the level of District Judge exercising original civil jurisdiction or, as the case
may be, Commercial Division of a High Court may appeal to the Commercial
Appellate Division of that High Court within a period of sixty days from the date
of the judgment or order:
Provided that an appeal shall lie from such orders passed by a Commercial
Division or a Commercial Court that are specifically enumerated under
Order XLIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as amended by this Act and
section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.".
13. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words "Commercial Appellate
Division", the words "Commercial Appellate Court and the Commercial Appellate
Division" shall be substituted.
14.  In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words, figures
and letter "with Order XIV-A", the words, figures and letter "with Order XV-A" shall
be substituted.
15. In section 17 of the principal Act, for the words "Commercial Courts" and
"Commercial Court", wherever they occur, the words "Commercial Courts, Commercial
Appellate Courts" shall be substituted.
16. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words "Commercial Court", the
words "Commercial Courts, Commercial Appellate Courts" shall be substituted.
17. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"21A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner and procedure of pre-institution mediation under
sub-section (1) of section 12A;
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or
in respect of which provision is to be made by rules made by the Central
Government.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session,
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.".
18.  In the Schedule to the principal Act,—
(i) in Paragraph 4, in sub-paragraph (D), in item (iv),—
(a) in the opening portion, the words "after the first proviso,"shall be
omitted;
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 15.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 20.
Insertion of
new section
21A.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Amendment
of Schedule.
5 of 1908.
26 of 1996.
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
5
(b) for the words "Provided further that", the words "Provided that"
shall be substituted;
(ii) in Paragraph 11, for the words "Commercial Court", the words
"Commercial Court, Commercial Appellate Court" shall be substituted;
(iii) after Paragraph 11, the following shall be inserted and shall be deemed
to have been inserted with effect from the 23rd October, 2015, namely:—
‘12. After Appendix H, the following Appendix shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘APPENDIX-I
STATEMENT OF TRUTH
(Under First Schedule, Order VI- Rule 15A and Order XI- Rule 3)
I ----- the deponent do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. I am the party in the above suit and competent to swear this affidavit.
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also examined
all relevant documents and records in relation thereto.
3. I say that the statements made in -----paragraphs are true to my knowledge and
statements made in -----paragraphs are based on information received which I believe
to be correct and statements made in ---paragraphs are based on legal advice.
4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material fact,
document or record and I have included information that is according to me, relevant
for the present suit.
5. I say that all documents in my power, possession, control or custody, pertaining
to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by me have been disclosed
and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and that I do not have any other documents
in my power, possession, control or custody.
6. I say that the above-mentioned pleading comprises of a total of ---- pages,
each of which has been duly signed by me.
7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents referred to
and relied upon by me.
8. I say that I am aware that for any false statement or concealment, I shall be
liable for action taken against me under the law for the time being in force.
Place:
Date:
DEPONENT
VERIFICATION
   I, ………………………. do hereby declare that the statements made above are
true to my knowledge.
Verified at [place] on this [date]
DEPONENT.".'.
19. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall apply only to
cases relating to commercial disputes filed on or after the date of commencement of
this Act.
20. (1) The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
Division of High Courts (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, anything done or any
action taken under the said Ordinance shall deemed to have been done or taken under
the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Application
of provisions
of this Act to
cases filed on
or after its
commence-
ment.
Repeal and
savings.
Ordinance 3
of 2018.
————
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
MGIPMRND—1689GI(S3)—21-08-2018.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
6
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
MANOJ 
KUMAR
Digitally signed 
by MANOJ 
KUMAR 
Date: 2018.08.21 
17:51:34 +05'30'
